---
title: "Accolades"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2003"
pages: [3]
author: null
section: null
---

## Accolades

Here’s what some of the esteemed users of NIC’s services have said in the recent past …. “I write this letter to convey my sincere appreciation of the efforts put in by NIC in arranging a four-location Video Conference between New Delhi, Gandhinagar, Sachivalaya, Bhuj Hospital and a remote village Chapredi, in Bhuj Taluka, on 25th January, 2003 morning. I am sure NIC will continue to do so in future also.” Sh. Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Hon’ble Prime Minister “The Prime Minister was fascinated by the excellent video conferencing facilities of NIC.” Sh. Arun Shourie, Hon’ble Union Minister for Communications and IT “Every other day I am reminded of the excellent work NIC is doing.” Sh. Arun Shourie, Hon’ble Union Minister for Communications and IT “This is indeed a matter of pride to note, that NIC has done pioneering work, to usher in computer culture in the government. NICNET provides the networking backbone for e-governance in the country”. Sh. Su.Thirunavukkarasar, Hon’ble MOS, Ministry of Communications and IT “It (Bhoomi Project) is a unique programme and really fascinating. This is a programme dearer to my heart. I compliment the Karnataka Revenue Department and NIC for this excellent work.” Sh. Venkaiah Naidu, Former Union Minister for Rural Development “I take this opportunity to commend the support provided by the National Informatics Centre to the Treasuries Department for its computerization.” Shri N. Chandrababu Naidu, Hon’ble Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh “I think the Government of India nationwide has done a lot of work (in IT) and we are proud of their work. And that is the work done by the National Informatics Centre. In many states, NIC has met the requirements of State Governments.” Sh. Rajeev Ratna Shah Former Secretary, Dept of Information Technology “NIC has been of immense help to Government to usher in E-Governance in the State and we look to their continued assistance for extending it to all spheres for better public service.” Sh. P. Shankar Former Chief Secretary, Govt.of Tamilnadu “I was thrilled and delighted to see the excellent work done in this registration office at Nemom. I congratulate all who have made this possible. Our aim must be to ensure that all the offices in Kerala of the Registration department are computerized on the same lines at Nemom.” Shri N. Vittal Former Central vigilance Commissioner Government of India “ Oh... this is CIC, I have already visited over 20 nos. of CIC and their contribution to the society is immense ” Lt. General S.K. Sinha Hon’ble Governor of Assam
