---
title: "ALWAR: ICT Prospers Amongst Wildlife & Heritage"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2012"
pages: [37, 38, 39]
author: "Satendra Singh, Manish Verma"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## ALWAR: ICT Prospers Amongst Wildlife & Heritage

Alwar (in the Mewat region) is surrounded by the Aravali Hills and has a unique recognition because of Sariska Tiger Reserve, Bala-Quila, Silished etc. Alwar with its historic forts & palaces, beautiful gardens offers an unforgettable experience for the visitor. The medieval fort crowning a scarped hill overlooks the town below. Founded by Rao Pratap Singh in the year 1775 AD., the district covers 8,380 sq. km. and is bounded on the north by Haryana on the east by Bharatpur on the south by Dausa and on the west by Jaipur districts.
NIC was established in the year 1987 and ever since, ICT support is being provided to district administration. The NIC district centre has made its presence felt amongst the people through various ICT initiatives in the district. It is partnering the administration in bridging the digital divide amongst the masses and by implementing various citizen- centric projects.
District website http://alwar.nic.in designed & hosted by NIC, is very informative and highlights the activities and functions of the departments. It also provides the information regarding the various initiatives undertaken by the district administration for the benefit of citizens. It is also useful to anyone wanting to know other details about the district and has many hits each day.
MAJOR ICT IMPLEMENTATIONS IN THE DISTRICT
Kerosene Cash Subsidy Scheme- Pilot Project in Kotkasim Tehsil/Block
It was taken as a special project by administration. Since far reaching nationwide socio-economic implications were supposed to be involved with the project, the execution strategy was developed in a maverick spirit of originality, creativity & experimentation.
NIC developed a web based software for the project. Process of feeding of relevant data (KYR+ inputs) like profile of card holders, their A/C numbers with Bank & Branch, subsidy amount deposited in their A/Cs, quantity of SKO received by them on monthly basis, LPG status (whether SBC or No. Gas Connection) is in full swing. KYR+ information will also be incorporated in their ID cards. In future only e-transfer of subsidy will be made in their A/Cs.
Economic Implications of the project : There exists a possibility of net saving of 60% of Kerosene. If this net saving of 60% is applied for the Alwar District on an annual allocation of 25920 KL, net saving of 15,552 KL annually is made which in monetary terms comes about Rs. 46.6 crores. For the state of Rajasthan on an annual allocation of 511344 KL, net saving of SKO is 3,06,806 KL, which in monetary terms comes about Rs. 920.4 crores.
Possibility of phenomenal saving of subsidised items has opened with the new dynamics of consumption pattern that has emerged during the progress of two month of the scheme, if project is executed nationwide. KRY+ inputs in UID cards will resonate further in detection & identification of actual user of subsidy based products. The whole exercise may open new vistas of reorganising PDS & thereby facilitating optimum use of country’s valuable resources & benefitting the exchequer.
Inauguration of Kerosene Cash Subsidy Scheme
TRANSPORT PROJECT (VAHAN & SARATHI)
The vehicle registration automation component (VAHAN) and the driving license issuance process computerization (SARATHI) have been implemented at Regional Transport office and other sub-division transport offices in Behror of the Alwar district. The project was on Pilot basis in 2005 and since then it running smoothly. Similarly SARATHI implemented on pilot basis in 2009 and since then it is functioning properly.
The vehicle registration, tax collection, fitness and other software modules implemented by transport departments have put a check on duplicate draft submission, multiple registration of the same vehicle, pending tax payments etc. The SARATHI application has helped in speeding up the process of issuance of new driving licence, renewal of driving license and issuance of learning license to the applicant.
IFMS (INTEGRATED FINANCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM) - It is an e-Governance initiative of Rajasthan Government for effective, accountable and transparent Public Finance Management. IFMS has been conceptualized as an umbrella system covering all modular systems and their integration. IFMS has been implemented successfully in Treasury and all sub treasuries of the district.
ASHUTOSH A.T. PEDNEKAR IAS Collector and DM Alwar, Rajasthan
NIC Alwar has become an integral part of district administration and has supporting various ICT activities from time to time. NIC has helped us in bringing about a qualitative change in the administration of the district. Close circuit camera has been setup at many important locations in Alwar city and activities of the city is regularly displayed in TV situated in my chamber. Technical support is being provided by the officials. NIC has been working very hard to promote good governance in district where people matter the most. The fact that the effort are going to be featured in Informatics the e-Governance bulletin from NIC, gives further momentum to the team to complete the tasks ahead . I wish the team led by Satendra Singh, DIO and Manish Verma, DIA the best in their present and future assignments.
PAY MANAGER - It is a Pay Bill Preparation System for the Employees of the Rajasthan Government, providing a common and integrated platform to prepare the pay bills. It has been implemented in the whole district and DDO’s have been trained to use the same.
APNAKHATA (LRC) - Land Record Computerization is running smoothly in all 12 Tehsils and all 2082 jamabandis have been computerized and 1/4th jamabandis (Rotation) are being generated every year through computer. Record is up to date and ROR (Record of Rights) are also being issued to the citizens from each and every tehsil regularly. 75 Cyber cafes have been issued Licenses to issue ROR to the citizens. RoR details can also be obtained through a KIOSK, established inside the Collectorate.
SUGAM - Single Window implemented in all 12 Tehsils thus facilitating timely delivery of various citizen services such as Issuance of bonafide certificate, caste certificate etc. The system is now being extended to common service centre with digital signature facilities. Through Sugam single point grievance redressal portal, Citizens can lodge their grievances related to any department. The grievance is forwarded to the concerned authorities for needful action. NIC has imparted training to all concerned officials to use the application properly.
“ Alwar LAN Diagram”
Dr. B K Gairola, DG and Dr Y K Sharma DDG NIC during visit to MGNREGA site Bhiwadi, Alwar
CIPA - Common Integrated Police Application has been implemented in all 32 police stations of Alwar District. Technical help is being provided to users as and when required.
NADRS (NATIONAL ANIMAL DISEASE REPORTING SYSTEM) - The hardware has been installed at all 12 locations and training has been provided to all Nodal officers (Veterinary officers).
E-GRAM - CMO project E-Gram monitoring system has been implemented successfully and training imparted to all Nodal officers and their operators to enter the data online. Training has also been provided to gram prabharies of the villages of all 14 panchayat samities for filling EG-1 and EG-2 forms.
VIDEO CONFERENCING - Video Conferencing facility has been provided to the departments and their respective ministers as well as their secretaries and directors.
COLLECTORATE LAN - The Internet Facility has been provided to the District Collector, ADM I, ADM II, ADM city, SDM, SP and District Court etc. and all sections of the collectorate. Network facility also extended to the treasury office under IFMS project.
FOR MORE DETAILS CONTACT:
Satendra Singh District Informatics Officer & Scientist-D NIC District Centre Collectorate, Alwar, Rajasthan rajalw@nic.in
