---
title: "Anti-harassment App called Não Me Calo wins International Girls Hackathon"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2015"
pages: [41]
author: null
section: "INTERNATIONAL E-GOV UPDATE"
---

## Anti-harassment App called Não Me Calo wins International Girls Hackathon

IGNITE or International Girls Hackathon organized in February 2015 has been won by a team of four young women coders from Porta Allegra in Brazil. The team has developed an app called Não Me Calo, which means “I will not shut up”. The app facilitates users to review various restaurants on the basis of how they treat women folks. The data generated by the app helps patrons in locating safest restaurants in the city for women. The app publicly encourages government officials and restaurant owners to fix harassment hotspots.

The International Girls Hackathon is part of IGNITE: Women Fueling Science and Technology, a global campaign and media project from Global Fund for Women that explores the roles of science and technology in advancing gender equality and advocates for women and girls’ increased access to and control of technologies. The hackathon was developed with lead partners including Black Girls Code, Girls Who Code and General Assembly. Held in February 2015, the #hackgirlsrights competition entailed intensive 24-hour coding collaborations among 10 teams in five cities around the world – Taipei, Taiwan; Trivandrum, India; Porto Alegre, Brazil; New York City; and Oakland, California. There was a tough competition among team of coders from the US, India and Taiwan for creating the app that will help in addressing the issues in creating safe spaces for women. The winning team will now collaborate with Global Fund for Women, the organizer of Hackathon event for accomplishing the development of app.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION:
http://ignite.globalfundforwomen.org/
