---
title: "Appscape: mGovernance and NIC Mobile AppStore Overview"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2017"
pages: [38]
author: "C J Antony"
section: "Appscape"
---

## Appscape: mGovernance and NIC Mobile AppStore Overview

Mobile is one of most rapidly evolving technology over last decade and showing its perceivable presence in eGovernance domain. There has been a shift in ways of implementing eGovernance by use of mobile technologies, which resulted in the buzzword - ‘mGovernance’. mGovernance is especially important for communication between government to citizen (G2C) and citizen to government (C2G), though it has dominant presence in government to business (G2B), government to employee (G2E) and government to government (G2G) also. Of late, application development paradigm is shifting to ‘Mobile First’ approach, where applications are designed primarily keeping hand-held devices in mind, and further extending the features and content for bigger screen.
National Informatics Centre has its own Mobile AppStore (https://egovmobileapps.nic.in/), as a centralized repository of all mobile applications in eGovernance domain developed by NIC. This AppStore has become a rich repository of mobile applications with applications from platforms like Windows, BlackBerry and iOS along with Android. Application owners across ministries/departments and states can showcase their mobile application which can further be reviewed and rated by an authenticated visitor on the portal. Portal provides feature of searching the application based on keyword and applications can be filtered based on sector and mobile platform that application belong to. The eGov Mobile AppStore provides different statistics for uploaded applications like state/division wise distribution of application, sector wise distribution of application and visitor statistics. Nearly 250 applications across 30 Sectors have been uploaded on eGov Mobile AppStore and the number is continuously increasing as more eGovernance applications are being developed. To contribute a Mobile Apps, users may login to this portal using their LDAP credentials, after which they are can submit application catalogue form.
This issue of AppScape covers a bunch of Mobile Apps from a variety of sectors extending from Judiciary to Finance and Rural to Transport. The eCourts Services App caters to the stake holders in tracking the status of court case in Taluk and District courts of the Country. The mParivahan and SpeedSpot Kannur Apps from the transport sector empowers citizen with instant access to various services related to the sector and help reporting the over speeding by public transport vehicles respectively. While the Gram Samvaad App provides rural citizens a single window access to information at Gram Panchayat level, the AwaasApp captures photographs of houses being constructed under Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana (Rural) for monitoring the progress, and the JanManrega app allows locating and sending feedback on geo-tagged MGNREGA assets in rural area. The Kerala GST App enables citizens to check GST registration status of dealers in the state; while the Manav Sampada App is a mobile interface to the eService book of employeess.
