---
title: "Bhawishyanidhi – GPF Automation"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2004"
pages: [14]
author: "NK Prasad, Bihar Correspondent"
section: "E-Governance Products & Services"
---

## Bhawishyanidhi – GPF Automation

Directorate of Provident fund came into existence in Bihar from 1st April, 1986. Prior to this, all GPF accounts were maintained by A.G, Bihar. It was decided during creation of Provident Fund Directorate of Bihar that A.G. will transfer all the employees Balance Transfer (B.T.) up to the Financial year 1981-1982 over to newly created directorate. € | NIC Takes the challenge It was decided that computerization of Provident Fund office would be carried out by NIC which had to practically start from the scratch as none of the information was completely available with the P.F. Office. Government was facing a lot of pending cases regarding P.F. settlement. The major activities of General Provident Fund can be grouped under the following heads – ™ Creation of Master ™ Subscription to GPF ™ Advances from GPF ™ Withdrawals from GPF ™ GPF A/C Maintenance ™ Final Settlement € | Introduction and Scope of BHAWISHYANIDHI software The scope of Vawishyanidhi is to streamline the State General Provident Fund in particular and in general for managing their day-to-day activities in an automated method. This system in addition to the implementation at Directorate can be implemented in district offices. The extent of replacing the manual system with the new automated system will be a step forward, providing better and error free service. The services to be covered by automating the entire process of GPF office activities will benefit in managing the key activities of accounts and administration. In addition the developed system will act as a single window platform for the Management in controlling and monitoring various resources of the department. € | Objectives of BHAWISHYANIDHI ™ To Make Accounting Process Faster ™ Proper Book-Keeping of the Record ™ Proper monitoring of Accounts Position ™ Complete tracking of the file Movement ™ Proper monitoring of the Advances € | Salient Features The automated software will cover the entire activities of GPF for ™ Faster Accounting/ Proper Book-Keeping/ Reducing staff workload ™ Various MIS reports/ Tracing of File-Movement within the office ™ Monitoring of Court Cases ™ Capturing of Account Allotment Number and Nominee details ™ Maintenance of yearly Ledger details like Subscriptions, Refunds and Advance / Withdrawal / Arrear details of all the subscribers ™ Capturing the subscription change requests of various subscribers ™ GPF Schedule details by manual entry or by importing data from treasury ™ Capturing and settling of missing Credits / Debits of a subscriber ™ Yearly Interest Calculation of various subscribers. ™ Generation of Check List/ Generation of Collateral Evidence/ Generation of GPF Slip ™ Maintain Ledger Register/ Maintain Interest Liability Register ™ Handling of Final Payment, Residual Payment and Corrected Final Payment to the subscriber / nominee ™ Handling / Maintain AG/District Balance Transfer status ™ Handling / Maintaining the file movement register The activities of office will be better managed by the software to monitor the day-to-day activity. In addition, the automated software will help in removing the hurdles of the department in timely calculation of Debit and/or Credit. The software provides timely submission of various reports to different authorities for effective monitoring. € | Future Application The Most important component of this project is making it fully web-enabled. An exercise of creating a web-site has already been initiated. It is planned to create an interface that will help the subscribers to check their accounts position. They can apply on-line for enrolment as subscriber. The web-site will also contain a public grievance forum through which Subscribers can submit their problems to the higher authorities. € | Technical Details Computing Model : Client/Server Operating System : Linux & Windows Server Family RDBMS : Oracle 9i Front-End : Visual Basic € | Finale & Security Measures Specific techniques of risk analysis, hazard analysis, fault tolerance, and safety trade-offs within the software engineering paradigm have been taken into consideration at the time of software development. The software is totally password protected and auto-log files are created in background. For any kind of hazard or fault, the auto-backup provision is available within this software. € | Training To successfully implement Bhawishyanidhi, number of exhaustive training programmes were conducted for the GPF officers of state govt. for various districts. Altogether 500 participants attended the training programme from districts and Directorate. These participants came in batches comprising of 25 participants a batch. Director, GPF has appreciated the efforts of NIC team comprising Shri AK Mohanty and Dr. Kanhaiya Pandey for designing, developing and implementing the Bhawishyanidhi software in the state within the specified time frame. For further information, mail to sio@bih.nic.in
