---
title: "Book Review ICT4D: Information and Communication Technology for Development"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2009"
pages: [48]
author: "P.K. Upadhyay"
section: "Views"
---

## Book Review ICT4D: Information and Communication Technology for Development

ICT4D is all about how Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) can be used to help the poor and marginalized people and communities and make a difference to their lives. The book provides an authoritative and accessible account of the use of ICTs in contemporary development practice. Tim Unwin, the author has incorporated the use of appropriate information and communication technology for development needs. The book seeks to combine theory with practical guidance - including both a conceptual framework for understanding the rapid development of ICT4D.
ICT4D provides account of key areas where ICTs have been incorporated into development practices concentrating particularly on health, education, governance, enterprise and rural development. The practical intents of the book provide a critique of recent attempt to use ICTs in development so that those working in the interest of poor people and marginalized communities can use these insights for empowerment.
The organization and structure of the book is shaped around practical dimensions. Boxed case studies provide detailed examples of issues and initiatives from a variety of countries and organizations. To understand different terminologies and agendas adopted in multidimensional field of ICT4D, authors have tried to provide distinct vocabularies, style of discourse and practical agendas in both the fields of ICT and development practices. For example, if wireless technologies are to be used effectively in delivering rural health services, it is important that such people understand each other and are able to work together effectively in teams. Many people with their global insights and experience have contributed within this book. Majority of the chapters and ideas are by Tim Unwin (UNESCO Chair in ICT4D and Professor of Geography at University of London). There are authenticated data, table and figures available reproduced with permission of ITU. The book is divided into two parts, Part-1 is for 'Contextual framework' and Part 2 is on 'Practical application' with 5 chapters in each part. Each chapter consists of many references useful for further reading. The ICT enterprises and its development, E-government and e-governance with ICT in Rural, Health and Education, the key issues in the field of ICT are given in reader friendly commentaries of relevant areas.
ICTs are becoming increasingly significant in making a difference and improving the impacts of development practice. However, ICT4D projects in Africa, Asia and Latin America have not always been as effective as their proponents had hoped. This book explores both the successes and the challenges facing such initiatives and provides clear recommendations for how they can be developed in more sustainable ways for the benefit of poor people and marginalized communities. There are similar books available on the topic like (i) Information & Communication Technology In Development Cases From India by S. Bhatnagar (2000), (ii) Information Technology And Development by M. Lakshmi Narasaiah (2004) (iii) Information Technology and Development by Arun Baweja (2000), etc. But this title ICT4D is the latest sketch on the topic published in 2009.
ICT4D is essential reading for everyone involved in planning, designing, policy making or implementing ICT4D initiatives. Information on this title is available at http://www.cambridge.org/9780521712361.
