---
title: "Building the Knowledge Society on the Internet"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2011"
pages: [48]
author: "Vivek Verma"
section: "Book Review"
---

## Building the Knowledge Society on the Internet

Title: Building the knowledge Society on the Internet
Author: Ettore Bolisani
Publisher: IGI Global USA
Year: 2008
Knowledge constitutes a valuable intangible asset for creating and sustaining competitive advantages and in today's networked societies, the capability to exchange, transfer, and share knowledge serves as a key factor for social and economic success. Knowledge sharing activities, are generally supported by knowledge management systems.
THE book "Building the Knowledge Society on the Internet: Sharing and Exchanging Knowledge in Networked Environments" by Ettore Bolisani presents a variety of viewpoints, approaches, and indications of the shared elements intended as the foundations of an emerging and fascinating multidisciplinary field and also proposes a vast panorama of research on the topic.
The "Knowledge Sharing: Interactive Processes Between Organizational Knowledge-Sharing Initiative and Individuals' Sharing Practice" offers an alternative approach to knowledge sharing. It is argued that to understand employee knowledge-sharing behaviour, one has to understand the interactions between organizational context and individuals' sense-making processes before achieving success. Studies in knowledge sharing are reviewed before the missing organizational factors are pointed out. Established theories are introduced where the influences of both formal and informal organizational factors on employee knowledge sharing are elaborated. "The Centrality of Team Leaders in Knowledge-Sharing Activities: Their Dual Role as Knowledge Processors", focuses on the extraction of accurate knowledge embedded in various Internet repositories and the effective sharing within organizational team, by exploring the central and dual role of team leaders in their capacity as knowledge processors, functioning both as "sources" and "recipients" of net-based knowledge. The "Knowledge Sharing in Virtual and Networked Organisations in Different Organisational and National Cultures" provides mechanisms for understanding the potential for conflict, for knowledge sharing, and building of trust among culturally diverse team members. Guidelines for successful knowledge sharing in the global environment are developed providing indications of the expected benefits for the organisation and the individuals involved. The "Towards an Implicit and Collaborative Evolution of Terminological Ontologies", concerns the importance of personal terminological ontologies, especially of a low-bias approach to their implicit and collaborative evolution, which contributes to the transformation from the information to the knowledge society. "Computer-Mediated Knowledge Sharing", examines the computer-mediated knowledge sharing mechanisms and proposes a typology based on media richness and social presence characteristics that can serve as a preliminary conceptual basis to select the most appropriate channel. "Understanding Knowledge Transfer on the Net: Useful Lessons from the Knowledge Economy", examines contribution of the current studies of the Knowledge Economy to give clearer understanding of KM and, particularly, of Knowledge Transfer processes that are a central element of KM. "Knowledge-Sharing Motivation in Virtual Communities", explores the motivation of virtual community members in regards to knowledge sharing and understands the underlying factors of such sharing behaviours. It also presents a conceptual model to illustrate the relationship between transaction cost, expectancy value, and knowledge sharing. "Opportunities and Obstacles to Narrow the Digital Divide: Sharing Scientific Knowledge on the Internet", examines key factors affecting the dissemination of scientific information and current challenges posed by the open-access initiative of making scientific information freely available worldwide.
