---
title: "business.gov.in : Your Online Guide to Business in India"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2008"
pages: [42]
author: null
section: "National Portal Update"
---

## business.gov.in : Your Online Guide to Business in India

Building a successful business is some thing that does not happen overnight. There are many key aspects of planning and managing a business and these are the intricacies including having in-depth knowledge of labour laws, legalities, taxation, investment opportunities, how and from where to acquire loans etc. If all these queries have been vexing you since long and you are looking out for an almanac of business which has authentic and up-to-date information related to business, then the answer to your prayers is business.gov.in, an initiative under India.gov.in, the National Portal of India. business.gov.in is not only a vast reservoir of comprehensive authentic and up-to-date information on business and its various aspects, but also a bank of important links to major business organizations and latest business news for your use! The portal provides all-inclusive information on the various stages of business lifecycle such as how to set up a business, growing and managing it and even how to change the line of business, if required. Apart from these piths of business, the portal also offers excellent literature on topics relevant from the point of view of business community. The portal has info modules on issues such as: business.gov.in ¡Starting a Business: Do you dream working for yourself, building your own business that offers you learning, financial rewards, lifestyle, security and lot more? Then visit this section which gives an insight to all the literature and information that you should know for starting a business, such as creating a business plan, making a product choice, setting up infrastructure, naming and registering a business, regulatory requirements and so on. ¡ Growing Business: Growth of a business is essential for sustaining its viability, dynamism and value- enhancing capability. It reflects the ability of a company to earn higher profits and compete with the rivals in an effective manner. Visit this module to get enriching information on issues such as business risks, joint ventures, opening branch offices, mergers and acquisitions, financial support, regulatory requirement and a lot more. ¡ Managing a Business: You have finally started a business and its growing pretty well!! Is that all you need? Perhaps managing your business well is also an essential part and through this portal you can be well- versed about the necessities of managing a business like; promotion, client relationship management, managing intellectual proficiency, insurance, marketing and sales, managing your finance, managing human resources, taxes etc. ¡ Doing Business Abroad: So you are a successful entrepreneur in India and now aim to venture abroad, or want to open an office in another country, but feel nervous about how to go on? Then your answer lies in business.gov.in visit this module and get all details about the intricacies involved in aspects such as investment policy, insurance, guidelines, investment routes, procedures, investment trends, legal aspects, business opportunities etc. related to doing business overseas ¡ Investment Opportunities and Incentives: As a successful entrepreneur if you would like to know more about the investment opportunities in business sector in India, visit this module and be lettered about the investment opportunities in India. ¡ Taxation: This term often makes entrepreneurs nervous because of improper awareness and knowledge about the formalities and legalities involved. This module provides in-depth knowledge on Taxation formalities in context to Individuals, Partnerships, Corporates, Agents etc. This section is the perfect manual for all those who desire to know more about Customs Duties, Wealth Tax, PAN, TDS, TCS, TAN etc. ¡ Indian Economy: This module includes information on Economic Indicators from 1991, Current State of the Indian Economy, Studies/Surveys/ Reports. Also explained are statistics such as Gross National Product (GNP), Gross Domestic product (GDP), Net National Product (NNP), per capita income, Gross Domestic Capital Formation (GDCF), etc. Visit business.gov.in for everything you ever wanted to know about business and its diverse aspects.
