---
title: "CAG : An e-Governance Success Story"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2009"
pages: [16, 17, 18]
author: null
section: "E-Gov Products & Services"
---

## CAG : An e-Governance Success Story

The Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) Office is a Supreme Audit Institution of India and it discharge its duties and responsibilities as '' public money to be properly managed and spent to good effect'' through its more than 180 field offices -Indian Audit and Accounts Department (IA&AD) located all over the India and abroad. Since the information handled by each office of IA&AD is substantial in volume and any type of major analysis is only feasible with the help of computers so Information & Communication Technology (ICT) has become a strategic resource to C&AG office.

NIC Centre, established in year 1988 at C&AG office is providing technical support to the offices of IA&AD in development of software for house-keeping functions besides the support of Networking to the buildings of C&AG and AGCR. NIC has implemented various Web based applications for the offices of IA&AD to enable them to access & upload data to Central computer and many projects developed for the functions of C&AG office. This has enhanced transparency & efficiency in office functioning of IA&AD.

Excerpt of feedback concluded by Sh. A N Chatterji, Dy. Comptroller and Auditor General
With the technical support of NIC in implementation of various e-Governance activities, C&AG office has become as a less paper office and more productive in carrying out effective Audit Planning and Management with greater transparency and efficiency. I express my sincere appreciation for the remarkable contribution made by NIC team under the leadership of Sh. S.C.D. Gupta, Senior Technical Director, in successful implementation of e-Governance initiatives and Network services in C&AG office.

Major ICT based activities implemented

Empanelment and Allotment of CA Firms for PSU Audit (EACAPSU): The web based System facilitates Chartered Accountant (CA) firms to submit their applications to be empanelled for PSUs Audit. The data captured from CA firms is processed through software to prepare ranking of the firms on various factors like date of constitution, number of CA partners, ISA/CISA qualified, CA employees, etc. The system has reduced the data entry work and thus saved a lot of time in empanelment and selection process of CA firms for allotment of audit of PSU ,correlating the rank of the CA firm and structure of the PSU. The list of selected CA firms empanelled & allotted audit of PSUs is published over the internet.

Web based interface for online submission of application

Web based MIS for staff strength and Men in position (MISSM): The system is implemented with a database server at C&AG office to monitor men in position against sanctioned strength in each field office. The system generates various MIS reports for the management.

Public Grievances Monitoring System (PGMS): The system is implemented to monitor a large number of complaints received from State Governments employees with regard to pension, DCRG, GPF etc. in CAG office. The complaints are reviewed and appropriate advices are issued to the concerned AG for speedy or interim settlement. The system generates various MIS reports related to pending cases.

Section Officer Grade Examination Results Processing System(SOGE): The system is implemented to process the results of various departmental examinations conducted by C&AG office for the employees of IA&AD. Due its confidentiality and secrecy, the system generates random fictitious number for every roll number and marks are entered against the fictitious numbers. The result is processed based on certain conditions and published over Internet.

Audit Planning System(APS): The system is implemented to help the field offices in preparing the plan for auditing a large number of manufacturing companies according to computed weightage points based on various factors such as revenue generated by the company, number of products made, company prone to evasion of excise duty, taxes, etc.

Budget/Expenditure Monitoring System (BEMS): The web based system helps the office to monitor expenditure actually incurred in each field office against budget allocated by C&AG office and facilitates in re-appropriation of the budget among its field offices. It enables the field offices to update the data of the expenditure details from their offices through internet. The System generates various MIS reports for the management.

MIS on RTI Cases (RTMIS): The software is implemented to monitor the RTI cases and to keep track of the cases so as to take requisite action in time.

MIS on Returns (MISRT): A web based system is developed for capturing the data of a large number of Returns being sent by the field offices at a regular interval of time to C&AG office and generates various MIS reports to monitor the performance of various functions in the field offices .

Inventory System (INVNTMIS): The system is developed for data base of computers items , stationary, etc. The software helps the General Section to keep track of the items issued and transferred to various sections.

Trend Analysis of the deficiencies in Inspections (TADI): A system is implemented to facilitate the user to generate various MIS reports to analyse the deficiencies noticed during the inspections of field offices by C&AG office.

Gradation (Seniority) list System (GIS): The system is implemented to prepare the gradation list of IA&AS officers and to generate various reports for the management.

MIS on Legal Cases (LCMIS): The software is implemented to monitor the legal cases initiated by the employees against IA&AD department and vice-versa. It facilitates to keep track of the cases so as to act upon them in stipulated time.

Website of AG's Conference: The website of Accountants General (AG) Conference held in October 2008 was hosted to act as a medium of communication and to facilitate the AsG about the activities of the conference like Agenda, Events, Venues, etc.

Sh. Vinod Rai, Comptroller and Auditor General of India addressing online on the eve of AG's conference

Diary System (DSRD): The software is implemented to direct all incoming mails to various divisions and to dispatch the letters from the sections. The system generates various Diary/Despatch reports. It has eliminated the maintenance of manual registers.

Library Information system (LIMS): A On-line Library System is implemented for searching of books/reports on title, subject, author, publisher, etc. The system also facilitates to generate reminder slip, issue slip, and reservation slip etc in addition to various periodical reports.

Payroll and Pay-bills(PAYBILL): The S/W is implemented in IA&AD offices to generate Pay-slips, Acquaintance Rolls, GPF statement, I-Tax statement, Form-16, salary file to Bank, etc.

Telephone Directory (TELMIS): On-line system is implemented to retrieve telephone number and e-mail address of IA&AS Officers, by querying on alphabet, name, designation, station etc.

Circulars on Web (CIRWEB): A web based system is implemented to view circulars and office orders issued by C&AG Office over internet at anytime from anywhere.

IT Systems Audit: IT systems in Govt. offices are audited using various audit software like IDEA, etc, for the correctness of the logic and in proper implementation of business rules as built in the software.

Work Flow Automation: The Work Flow Management software is implemented to automate various office routine tasks by reducing the requirement of movement of documents across the hierarchy for approvals, by facilitating the officers to access and upload the documents, etc to the Central Computer.

IntraCAG Portal: It provides a single interface to access by the officials of C&AG for various housekeeping applications and the information about its day to day activities.

Website of C&AG Office: A Web site www.cag.gov.in is hosted to provide the information to the people about C&AG office, News & Publications, links to the websites of its field offices, Audit Guidelines, Tender Notice, RTI Act, Audit reports presented to Parliament and State legislature, etc.

Networking: Network Connectivity to both the buildings of C&AG and AGCR building through 10 MBps OFC in each building and 2x2 MBps leased lines in CAG office. The Local Area Network (LAN) between both the buildings of C&AG office has been established to automate the office routine task.
