---
title: "Changing Scenario in ICT enabled Veterinary Services and Livestock Informatics"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2012"
pages: [48]
author: "M Moni"
section: "Perspective"
---

## Changing Scenario in ICT enabled Veterinary Services and Livestock Informatics

Indian Livestock Sector is predominantly rural and an integral adjunct to crop husbandry and has immense potential for growth. The biggest impediment to growth of this sector is the large scale prevalence of diseases, affecting adversely animal productivity. Presence of animal diseases deters in the livestock sector. A globally significant role for the Indian Livestock System, therefore, depends critically on India’s ability to eradicate animal diseases. India has a vast network of scientific and research institutions (ICAR and Agricultural Universities/Animal and Veterinary Sciences Universities) designed to support a modernizing livestock sector, through research, education, development, training and extension services.
As an enabling technology, Information and Communication Technology (ICT) plays an important role in the efficient use of available resources to maximize Livestock production and productivity in the country. e-Governance Programme and Plans are given due importance in social, development and economic sectors in India. The Ninth Plan (1997-02) sub-committee report had envisaged building up reliable databases and network based information systems for all activities of the Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector at districts, state and national level using NICNET facilities and also establishment of an “Animal Production and Health Information System Network (APHNET)” in the country. The genesis of development of APHNET has been taken from the recommendations of the National Conference on Informatics for Sustainable Agricultural Development (ISDA-95) held in May 1995, in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture and National Informatics Centre.
During the 11th plan, the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries of the Central Ministry of Agriculture has launched the National Animal Disease Reporting System (NADRS)( http://nadrs.gov.in and http://nadrsapp.gov.in ) to monitor about 143 OIE listed diseases, schedules in the “The Prevention and Control of Infectious & Contagious Diseases in Animals Act 2009” in the country by networking and creating ICT infrastructures in about 7032 offices of the Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services Centres located at block, district, state and central levels, involved in animal disease monitoring and surveillance activities. The Livestock farmers will be interacting with the NADRS Portal through mobile applications. This NADRS project facilitates, among the others, improving operational efficiency of the Disease Governance System, instant alerts to the stakeholders (through SMS and Email) for outbreak of diseases, spread of diseases, remedial measures, expert advices etc., preventing revenue loss by better management of animal health, disseminating information related to animal diseases to all stakeholders in a timely and efficient manner, and above all providing Disease Intelligence System (DIS) using BI Tools, GIS tools and DSS tools for advisory to livestock farmers and associated stakeholders. State Governments desire to network all Veterinary Institutions (Hospitals, Clinics, and Dispensaries etc) under NADRS.
Many State Governments have shown interests to include NADRS as a subject at the B.Vsc level. The Disease Intelligence System will be developed in collaboration with the ICAR Institutes and Faculties of Veterinary Sciences of the State and Central Agricultural Universities. NADRS is envisaged as the backbone of “Informatics Network” Programme to strengthen animal disease Early Warning System (EWS), Research and Advisory services in India. In addition to NADRS project, the Ministry of Agriculture has also launched “Livestock Management” as one of the 12 Cluster of services identified under the Agricultural Mission Mode Project under the National e-Governance Programme in Agriculture (NeGP-A).
I propose that the 12th Plan recommends the establishment of APHNET in India to facilitate “e-Governance System through telemedicine” in the Livestock Sector, which is predominantly “rural” and is cultured by “resource-poor” farmers. This e-Governance system should facilitate “Animal Identification and traceability”, “National Database on Livestock Farmers and his livestock resources” and “Expert Advisory System with strong base of Knowledge Management (KM) covering all aspects of Livestock sector, so as to bring smile on the faces of livestock farmers.
