---
title: "Chhattisgarh, ‘the Rice Bowl’ of India: In Constant Pursuit Of Excellence Through ICT"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2017"
pages: [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]
author: "Edited by PRASHANT BELAWARIAR, MANOJ KUMAR MISHRA, Y. V. SHREENIVAS RAO"
section: "From the States"
---

## Chhattisgarh, ‘the Rice Bowl’ of India: In Constant Pursuit Of Excellence Through ICT

The NIC State Centre has been instrumental in providing ICT based efficient and accessible eGovernance services to citizens by implementing projects and providing able technical support for various initiatives of the Government. Majority of eGovernance applications, frameworks, platforms and websites of the State have been developed, implemented and maintained by the NIC State Centre.
Formed on the 1st November 2000 by dividing Madhya Pradesh, the state of Chhattisgarh is the 10th largest state in India in terms of area. The state is blessed with abundant natural beauty, waterfalls, rivers, caves, vast forests with a variety of wild life as well as diamond, iron, coal and bauxite mines. The ancient temples and structures dating back to 5th century A.D. are the surviving symbols of the state’s glorious history and rich culture.
A list of IT infrastructure and some of the projects implemented in the recent years has been presented in the following sections.
NATIONAL KNOWLEDGE NETWORK (NKN)
A high speed (Multi-Gigabit) network has been setup in over 30 institutes and universities, including the IIM & NIT of the state for knowledge and information sharing. Chhattisgarh State Wide Area Network (CG SWAN) and State data Centre (SDC) are also connected over the NKN. Based on this high-speed network, a State Of The Art Virtual Classroom has been established in NIT Raipur. The Wi-Fi Connectivity at Mantralaya and HOD building uses NKN connectivity. SWAN DMC has been integrated with the NIC network at 17 districts of the state as well as an OFC ring has been established among institutes like NIT, Pt. Ravi Shankar, GAC and Ayush University to provide redundancy.
CENTRALISED ONLINE REAL-TIME ELECTRONIC PDS (COREPDS)
Chhattisgarh has successfully launched FPS automation under the name COREPDS (Centralised Online Realtime Electronic PDS). COREPDS has introduced Aadhaar authentication of the beneficiary at the time of service delivery for checking against proxy issues and empowering beneficiaries with the right to choose FPS by offering portability of FPS, to improve service delivery. In COREPDS, FPSs are equipped with an Android tablet with GPRS connectivity. PDS commodities are delivered to beneficiaries with Aadhaar authentication or with OTP (One Time Pin) authentication. They can now go to any FPS to claim their entitlements. Portability has also introduced the possibility of losing customers for FPSs and encouraged competition among them, giving them a reason to improve service delivery, in terms of not only quality and quantity of commodities but also in terms of behaviour with the beneficiaries at the FPSs.
COMPUTERIZED FOOD GRAIN SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
Chhattisgarh operates computerized food grain supply chain starting with paddy procurement from farmers to its storage, milling and distribution of rice and other commodities to 5.9 million ration card holders through 12,800 Fair Price Shops (FPS). As a part of this project, 2000 paddy procurement centres, 70 storage centres, all concerned district offices, 120 Civil Supplies Corporation distribution centres and 35 FCI rice receiving centres have been computerized covering six different organizations involved in food grain management. Farmers are receiving their dues through online account transfer within 48 hours. Miller’s registration, agreements with millers and generation of delivery orders etc. is computerized. The whole PDS supply chain has also been computerized. Truck dispatch information is being sent to more than 60,000 vigilant citizens to check for diversion.
LAND RECORDS COMPUTERIZATION PROJECT (Online BHUIYAN & BHU-NAKSHA)
After the successful implementation of its client-server model of the application for 14 years, an online version of the software has been developed and implemented in all tehsil offices. It provides the facility to enter and modify information related to khasra, crop, land use, irrigation sources, land revenue, carryout mutation and print Khasra and Khatauni reports. The application supports UNICODE fonts for entering data in Devnagari. Provisions for Aadhaar seeding have also been made in the application. An interface for banks has been provided to record loan sanction details to prevent multiple loan issuance against same Khasra. Digital signing of documents is being introduced to enable citizens to instantly download Khasra and Khatauni reports (with legal sanctity) for any purpose. A mobile application has also been developed which enables Patwaris to update records on tablet and the public to access basic land information. An open source based comprehensive online tool, BHU-NAKSHA, has been developed which stores and secures the digitized parcel maps and helps users edit them to reflect actual changes arising out of mutations. The software caters to all basic necessities of Patwari with regard to parcel map management. The informative dashboards provided at Patwari, Tehsildar, District Collector and Secretary levels ensure effective monitoring of the project’s implementation. These applications can be accessed at the Revenue department’s website http://revenue.cg.nic.in.
REVENUE CASE MONITORING SYSTEM http://cg.nic.in/revcase
This is an online application to record details of revenue cases of various revenue courts in the state. It facilitates daily cause list preparation, case search based on certain parameters for the public to find out the current status of a case, final order generation, scanning and archiving documents related to case etc. Dashboard facility is also available for senior officers to monitor case disposal at various courts.
E-GAZETTE http://cg.nic.in/egazette
This web-enabled application facilitates citizens to search through stored State Government Gazettes (Ordinary and Extraordinary) by providing minimum information such as notification date, department name etc. Citizens can download Gazette notifications instantly without having to visit departments to obtain a copy.
E-KOSH: TREASURY COMPUTERIZATION
The product is aimed at providing solutions for effective fiscal management, budgetary control on expenditure, receipts, accounting, online tax payment etc. An e-Payment system is being facilitated to ensure that payments are credited to the beneficiary’s bank account directly from the treasury with respect to the salaries, sales tax refunds etc. e-Kosh is a hybrid system that has two components e-Kosh (Core) offline and e-Kosh online (online portal) with synchronization between these two. While e-Kosh (Core) takes care of process automation at treasuries, e-Kosh online provides online information on expenditure, receipts, budget availability etc. e-Kosh online provides 99% cashless payment.
E-AWAS – CHHATTISGARH HOUSING BOARD http://cghb.gov.in
The complete end to end computerization of CGHB is being undertaken and two modules viz. Estate and Accounts have been rolled out.
Estate module allows:
• Sale of forms online and online registration of allottee
• Allotment of a house through a live lottery and issuance of online allotment letter
• Investor login for tracing the payment and project details
• Support for both commercial and residential property
Account module allows:
• All the accounting reports viz. daily cash and voucher reports, bank reconciliation and ledger reports along with the various bills viz. hand and money receipts, pay and advance bills are generated online
• The other monthly and yearly reports viz. trail balance, income and expenditure and balance sheet are also generated online.
E-PAYROLL
The online payroll software is implemented at the state to facilitate DDOs to generate salary bills, personal claims, arrear bills for each state government employee. The eKosh Project received the Oracle e-Governance Excellence Award in 2006 and India-Best Skoch award in 2013.
COMMERCIAL TAX DEPARTMENT COMPUTERISATION http://comtax.cg.nic.in
To provide a simplified, rational and progressive tax system, with a view to increasing the tax revenue of the state, a completely automated system was developed for the business owners dealing in VAT & CST. This system allows them to complete the registration as well as file returns online. It also has features for online forms, amendments, cancellations and integration with e-Challan and eRefund of the treasury. Complete support for the rollout of GST in the state is also being provided.
E-ROJGAR: ONLINE EMPLOYMENT SERVICE (http://cg.nic.in/exchange)
This is a web application that takes care of all the common activities carried out at employment exchanges to maintain uniformity of the procedures such as registration, vacancy booking, submission of candidates to the employers, employment statistics and vocational guidance and career counselling for self-employment.
VIDHAN SABHA COMPUTERIZATION http://cg.nic.in/cgvidhanqams
A web based MIS application which caters to the question/ answer monitoring needs of the State Assembly. On one hand, it takes care of activities related to the initiation of a question by MLAs till its finalization and sending it to the HODs on Vidhan Sabha side and on the other hand, it takes care of the activities starting from receiving the question by HODs/Secretary till the reply is sent to Vidhan Sabha from the Ministry’s side.
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES DEPARTMENT COMPUTERIZATION
The Government of India has initiated Ease of Doing Business (EoDB) to make India a better place for doing business and to promote this, rankings have been given to the states of India on the basis of their performance in offering services to industries. Chhattisgarh government has started computerization of its services. For this, all the services offered by the department like clearances, various certificates and incentives need to be online. Chhattisgarh State has been ranked 4th for the second consecutive year in Ease of Doing Business (EoDB) index, organised by Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP), Ministry of Commerce and Industries & World Bank.
IGMIS - INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM (https://igkvmis.cg.nic.in)
IGMIS was conceived as a framework incorporating fully digitized solutions for all activities of Indira Gandhi Krishi Vishwavidyalya (IGKV), Raipur. It is a web-enabled, role and work-flow based ERP solution for IGKV to accomplish activities like counselling, education, examination, research, extension, establishment, finance, web portal etc. This integrated system enables e-Governance in 31 Colleges, 8 Research Stations and 20 KVKs situated at the most remote places of Chhattisgarh. It is highly beneficial for students, employees and farmers of Chhattisgarh.
IGMIS MOBILE APP
IGKV introduces the next generation experience through the IGMIS mobile application to enhance quality and effectiveness of education and learning on favourite mobile/ tablet devices. It provides access to student profile, registration card, fee receipts, result notifications and an employee corner.
CSSDA (CHHATTISGARH STATE SKILL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY) PORTAL (https://cssda.cg.nic.in)
It is a web application that takes care of the training provided under the skill development scheme of CM of Chhattisgarh in Modular Employable Skills (MES) courses right from the registration of the candidates for training, training batch creation, TBN number and ABN number generation to assessment of training batches and certification of the candidates.
Biometric attendance of trainees at VTP centres has been integrated with the CSSDA portal to ensure the quality of skill training.
A need-based skill survey module has also been developed that captures the data of skill survey conducted on the skill seekers of the age group 14-45 years to identify the top three priority sectors in which the skill training is required the most.
DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION: EDUCATION PORTAL http://eduportal.cg.nic.in
The basic objective of the education portal is to create a single point source for all the information related to schools, teachers and students. The portal provides an updated view of the schools’ basic information, infrastructure details, teachers’ contact information, academic qualification details, posting and promotion details, official notices and circulars etc. The portal also facilitates generation of various types of official orders like posting, promotion, transfer, bill payment, increment, leave sanction, salary deduction, disciplinary action, LPC etc.
CROP DOCTOR
Crop Doctor is an Android based bilingual mobile application for farmers. It provides a solution for problems related to insects, diseases and nutrient deficiency management of rice, wheat and maize. This mobile app is picture based, downloadable from the Google Play Store.
SUMMARY
NIC State Centre, Chhattisgarh has been instrumental in providing assistance and technical expertise aimed towards making the lives of the citizens easier by improving access to various eGovernance schemes. Their efforts have helped the administrators at various levels of the Government in managing the various schemes and initiatives of the Government more effectively. The State Centre will endeavour to do exemplary work in the field of ICT and eGovernance for many years to come.
For further information, please contact:
MANOJ KUMAR MISHRA
Sr. Technical Director & SIO NIC
AD-II/14, Admin Block, Mahanadi Bhavan, Mantralaya, Naya Raipur, Chhattisgarh -492 002
Email: mk.mishra@nic.in
Phone: 0771- 221238
