---
title: "CLAIMS–Bringing Transparency in Public Service"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2008"
pages: [33, 34]
author: "Asha Varma"
section: "E-Gov. Products & Services"
---

## CLAIMS–Bringing Transparency in Public Service

The CLAIMS (Computerized Lok Ayukta Information Management System) is an open source initiatives of NIC Kerala that aims to provide an easy and transparent mechanism to the citizens for filing complaints and grievances with the Lok Ayukta in the state. The software is developed as LAMP based system and has evolved as a product that can be implemented in any of the Lok Ayuktas across the country. Kerala Lok Ayukta The Kerala Lok Ayukta Act, 1999 (Act 8 of 1999) is to make provision for the appointment and functions of certain authorities for making enquiries related to matters specified in List II or List III of the Seventh Schedule, Constitution of India. The Kerala Lok Ayukta consists of one Lok Ayukta and two Upa Lok Ayuktas. The complaints against any public authorities/Govt. servants related to Mal Administration, Bribe, Corruption, Allegation, Inaction etc. will come under the jurisdiction of Lok Ayukta. As Lok Ayukta registers large number of cases, an information system is required for the management and monitoring of related documents and activities. Inauguration of CLAIMS by Hon'ble Registrar Lok Ayukta, Sh. H.Haripal This need was outsmarted by computerizing the various functionalities of Kerala Lok Ayukta, and the office can now deliver better information services to the public. What is CLAIMS? The Case Information System (CIS) developed by NIC Pune and implemented in the District Courts of Maharashtra was customized, extended, value added and implemented as CLAIMS for Kerala Lok Ayukta The CLAIMS is proposed to be customized for Kerala Women's Commission - VANITHA and for DRT (Debts Recovery Tribunal) of Ernakulam. The system is packed with various applications and modules viz: Case Information System (CIS), Assets and Liabilities Monitoring System for public Servants and CLAIMS-NET Case information system (CIS) With this system the Kerala Lok Ayukta can now register Complaints against Government and Public Servants and executes the Judgments for various types of Complaints such as Corruption and Allegation, Mal Administration, Bribe & Forgery, Pension Grievances, Undue Delay or Inaction, Biased Action of Public Servants etc. The CIS Application – Case Filing Citizens can file a complaint against any public servant or Government servant to Lok Ayukta Court without any hassle. The Complaint, which comes under the jurisdiction of Kerala Lok Ayukta is filed and registered and the complaints accepted are allocated to a Court with a Hearing date. The Judges of the Lok Ayukta on hearing of the complaint, execute the Judgment on the Complaint. The 'Cause List' (the list of Complaints to appear before the court) for the current date or for a range of dates can be generated from the system. Some of the salient features of CIS are-Filing and Registration of Complaints, Allocation of Court, Proceeding of the Complaints, Presently Information, Grouping/Connecting cases, Transfer of cases between courts, Case advancing, Restore/Review Cases, Cause list, Notices/Summons Generation, Graphical reports, Ad-hoc query, Litigant Updation, Backlog entry of cases etc. Hon'ble Lok Ayukta Sh. Justice K Sreedharan, Upa Lok Ayuktas Sh. Justice N. Krishnan Nair and Sh. Justice K. A Mohammed Shafi (from right) reviewing CLAIMS Assets and Liabilities Monitoring System The Public servants and staff of Institutions come under the jurisdiction of Kerala Lok Ayukta. It is mandatory to declare the movable and immovable properties of the public servant and his/her family once in two years. Accessing of this system leads to Master data of all public Servants, Filing of Property Statements, Scrutiny of property Statements, and Identification of defaulters. CLAIMS-Net The CLAIMS-Net is the portal (http://lokayuktakerala.gov.in) for Kerala Lok Ayukta which has been constituted for investigating into the allegations of corruption and mal-administration against public servants and for the speedy redressal of grievances of the public. Citizens can access a host of services from here which includes On-line filing of cases, Case Status, Cause List, Next Hearing Date of a case, Various Judgments and orders, Master Data of Advocates, Master Data of all Public Servants, Property Statements submission Verification, Downloadable forms etc. In response to their complaints and grievances, citizens are benefited with various vital services, say for example the Case Status, Querying the details of the Cases, Next hearing date of a case, Status of copy documents application, “Cause List” to advocates and also access Lok Ayukta Information such as Acts, Order and Judgments. Quote of appreciation from Hon'ble Kerala Lok Ayukta, Sh. Justice K. Sreedharan-Ex Chief Justice of Gujarat High Court. “…..I have great pleasure in testifying that, the officers of National Informatics Centre, Kerala unit have done a good job in implementing the CLAIMS (Computerized Lok Ayukta Information Management System)…… I am also happy to note that all the functionaries of Kerala Lok Ayukta, including the Judges, have undergone a course of training in National Informatics Centre……….”
