---
title: "Computer support for 6th All India Education Survey"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 1995"
pages: [7]
author: "From our Local Correspondent"
section: "PROJECTS"
---

## Computer support for 6th All India Education Survey

National Informatics Centre has been entrusted with the responsibility of developing a Management Information System (MIS) for the Sixth All India Educational Survey being conducted by the National Council of Educational Research and and Training (NCERT). The Sixth All India Educational Survey is being conducted to collect information on different aspects of education which include: - Educational facilities in habitations, villages and towns. - Basic information on primary/upper primary/secondary/higher secondary schools: location, management, availability of minimum infrastructure, medium of teaching, class-wise enrolment, availability of facilities for games, library, laboratories and courses. - Selective detailed information from schools pertaining to languages. - Enrolment information on higher secondary classes from degree colleges. - Individual teacher information: service particulars, teaching experience, qualification, training, etc. - District wise information on education finance. A booklet named Guidelines for Survey Officers has been brought out by NCERT giving detailed instructions on how to conduct the Survey. The Survey is being conducted in collaboration with the state governments. Collection and manual scrutiny of data is nearing completion in almost all states and union territories. All the data collected during the Survey is being computerized to create a massive database on education. Computerization work was initiated by organizing a workshop of the State Survey Officers and the NIC State Informatics Officers in March 1994. Various aspects such as data entry, validation, integration with the 1991 Population Census database and creation of a education database of villages, towns and schools were discussed and streamlined. To help in the process, NIC brought out a reference guide on creation of a database on schools. Data entry and computer validation of data have gained momentum and are expected to be completed very soon. Extensive analysis of data has been planned to bring out all features of the Survey and present a total picture of school education. The Survey aims at bringing out around 600 statistical reports both for the national and state levels to meet the needs of the Users. This will be possible only with active and intensive computer support. A software has already been developed for the MIS. The work started with a workshop organized for the State Informatics Officers of NIC in February, 1995 and is going on in full swing. At this rate, basic data and macro information for the state and district administration should be available on magnetic tapes within the next eight months. Certain provisional information relating to the number of schools and institutions, enrolment and educational facilities in rural areas will be available on NICNET in a couple of months.
