---
title: "Computerization of Statistical Details at UP"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 1999"
pages: [12, 13]
author: null
section: "Projects"
---

## Computerization of Statistical Details at UP

The nodal statistical agency in Uttar Pradesh is Economics & Statistics Division (ESD) of State Planning Institute, under the Ministry of Planning. At present there is an office of the Economics & Statistics Officer in every district and a Divisional Deputy Director (Economics & Statistics) office in every division. Zila Sankhyakiya Patrika (ZSP) is the most important annually published document of Planning Department available at district level which is being regularly published for every district in Uttar Pradesh since 1977. It contains the information at District (Total/Rural/Urban), Community Development Block and Town levels. There are more than 3500 parameters. Most of the information is for three years i.e. current and previous two years. The major sectors covered are General Information, Area and Population, Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries, Co-operation, Industry, General Education and Social Welfare, Health and Family Welfare, Electricity, Transport and Communication, Institutional Finance, Water Supply, Panchayati Raj, etc. Divisional Sankhyakiya Patrika (DSP) is the consolidation of Zila Sankhyakiya Patrika and is annually published since 1981. The presentation of information is at Division and District levels. The computerisation of Sankhyakiya Patrika in Uttar Pradesh along with Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh was taken as a pilot project by NIC in early 1993. A menu driven, user friendly software was developed and tested in few districts. On the basis of feedback software was modified and implemented in all the districts for preparing 1994 Patrika through NIC district centres. This software captures village wise information for the generation of table 64 (having detailed information) of ZSP. Subsequently a revised software with Manual was also released for preparing Zila Sankhyakiya Patrika-1995 as per modified format of ZSP. In most of the districts ZSP,95 has already been published. The work on ZSP,96 and 97 is also in progress in the districts. Software for Divisional Sankhyakiya Patrika has also been developed. For testing this software, Moradabad Divisional Sankhyakiya Patrika 1992 was prepared. By this software DSP 1994 has already been prepared for all the Divisions. This system has been adopted by the Planning Department. In future, Time Series Analysis will be possible by these data bases. These data bases are being used by District Administration, Panchayat Raj Institutions and other agencies.
