---
title: "Cyber Governance"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2010"
pages: [40]
author: "Lokesh Joshi, NIC"
section: "News"
---

## Cyber Governance

A look at some of the recently launched Indian Government Websites…. Cabinet Secretariat, Govt.of India (http://cabsec.gov.in/). The newly launched website of cabinet secretary is one of the few sites in the government web space that is fully compliant to guidelines for Indian Government Websites. The website is friendly to assistive devices like screen readers and has a host of features that make it accessible to the differently abled. The user can adjust contrast, decrease/increase font size according to their needs and preferences. The whole site can be operated by key board alone. The site, in particular, provides information about the functions of the Cabinet Secretariat and detailed guidance about the allocation of business rules of the Government of India. Within the site, information about the Cabinet Secretariat's Committee on Disputes, Press releases, Tenders, Circulars and RTI are also made available. This easily navigable and visually appealing website of Cabinet Secretariat also render a slew of information from different sources such as the department of Public Grievances, National Authority Chemical Weapons Convention, Department of Performance management and Govt. of India Directory. The Information is provided and updated by Cabinet Secretariat, Govt. of India. Project Uday, Government of Madhya Pradesh (http://projectuday.nic.in). The Urban Administration & Development Department, MP has come out with a lively site for their indigenous Project Uday. The Project Uday which is functioning under Water for Asian Cities programme is all about Urban Water Supply and Environment improvement and Sanitation in the four cities of MP viz: Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore and Jabalpur. The content rich website provides a good deal of information on the organization, financing plans, objectives and scopes as well as the components and outputs of the project. Apart from this, information on tenders, events, reports, publications are also published regularly in the website. The websites provides an excellent platform for professionals allowing them to discuss and exchange information on technical and management issues enabling competency development. MSME development Institute, Mumbai (http://msmedimumbai.gov.in). The Small scale industry is playing a predominant role in driving economic growth and hence it is imperative to raise professional standards. Keeping the fact in mind, the MSME development institute, Mumbai unveiled its official website for its stakeholders. The website gives a hawk eyed view about the workflow of the institute in a very detailed structure. A user can browse on the government policies towards small scale industries, and the ministry's role in promoting and facilitating Micro, Small and Medium enterprises within the state. Details about the various programs, schemes, development and trainings, acts, rules, notifications and administration can be easily access from the content rich website. This dynamic website showcases the implementation of activities of promotion and development in the SME sector in Mumbai.
