---
title: "Domain Names, .IN Domains, and GOV.IN Registration Process"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2005"
pages: [13, 14, 15]
author: null
section: "TECHNOLOGY UPDATE"
---

## Domain Names, .IN Domains, and GOV.IN Registration Process

What is a Domain Name?
Internet Domain Names worldwide have assumed greater significance in recent times with the Internet increasingly being used as an effective medium for commerce, governance, education and communication. In the simplest of terms, a Domain Name is another term for a unique Internet address.
Every host computer or server on the Internet has a unique address called its "IP address" (IP stands for "Internet Protocol"). IP addresses are hard to remember. The Domain Name System (DNS) makes using the Internet easier by allowing a familiar string of letters (the "domain name") to be used instead of the arcane IP address. So instead of typing 164.100.52.49, one can type 'www.nic.in' that makes addresses easier to remember.
Domain Names always have two or more parts, separated by dots. The part on the left is the most specific, and the part on the right is the most general. More than one domain name can be mapped to the same Internet address. This allows multiple individuals, businesses, and organizations to have separate Internet identities while sharing the same Internet server.
However, usually all of the machines on a given Network will have the same right-hand portion of their Domain Names.
ICANN
The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) is the International Organisation responsible for managing and coordinating the Domain Name System (DNS) to ensure that every address is unique and that all users of the Internet can find all valid addresses. It does this by overseeing the distribution of unique IP addresses and domain names. It also ensures that each domain name maps to the correct IP address. It does this by overseeing the distribution of unique technical identifiers used in the Internet's operations and delegation of Top-Level Domain names (such as com, info, etc.).
ICANN operates the InterNIC website (http://internic.net) which provides information and services to the public regarding domain name registration. Among other things, the website facilitates the users to search domain records in the Registry WHOIS, find registrar contact details in the accredited registrar directory, file a complaint or report any inaccuracy in WHOIS database.
Domain names can be registered through many credible companies (known as 'registrars') appointed by ICANN. The registrar you choose will ask you to provide various contact and technical information for registration. The registrar will then submit the technical information to a central directory known as the "registry." This registry provides other computers on the Internet the information necessary to send you e-mail or to find your Website. You will also be required to enter a registration contract with the registrar, which sets forth the terms under which your registration is accepted and will be maintained.
Top Level Domain (TLD)
The right-most label in a domain name is referred to as its "top-level domain" (TLD). The Domain Name System (DNS) forms a tree-like hierarchy. Each TLD includes many second-level domains (such as "icann" in "www.icann.org"); each second-level domain can include a number of third-level domains, and so on.
The DNS (Domain Name System) structure contains a hierarchy of names. The root, or the highest level, of the system is unnamed. Top Level Domains (TLDs) are divided into classes based on rules that have evolved over time. Most TLDs have been delegated to the individual countries. These are called country code Top Level Domains, or ccTLDs. In addition, there are a limited number of 'generic' Top Level Domains (gTLDs) which do not have a geographic or country designation. Some of the widely used ones are:
.COM: Companies and enterprises (for commercial use)
.ORG: All non-profit organizations
.NET: Internet connectors and service providers
.EDU: Educational institutions
.GOV: Government departments
.AC: Scientific research institutions
.BIZ: Businesses
Globally, there are approximately 60 million Internet domains registered. Of these, about 40 million are in gTLD category, while about 20 million are in the ccTLD category. The administration of gTLD rests with ICANN with membership from different countries and experts in the field. The responsibility of managing the ccTLD, as mentioned above, has been entrusted to the individual countries that, in general, follow the guidelines provided by ICANN.
In the 1980s, seven gTLDs (.com, .edu, .gov, .int, .mil, .net, and .org) were created. Domain names may be registered in three of these (.com, .net, and .org) without restriction; the other four have limited purposes. Over the next twelve years, various discussions occurred concerning additional gTLDs, leading to the selection in November 2000 of seven new TLDs for introduction. These were introduced in 2001 and 2002. Four of the new TLDs (.biz, .info, .name, and .pro) are unsponsored. The other three new TLDs (.aero, .coop, and .museum) are sponsored.
Domain Names: A Country's Identity
There is a growing awareness that the number of domain name registrations in a country is a significant indicator of its Internet proliferation and a measure of its popularity in the Internet space and the various countries are showing a keen interest in promotion & registration of country level domain names. Many countries have adopted liberal and market friendly policies to register large number of Domain Names under their country code, broadly consistent with globally accepted policy and procedures of Domain registration. Countries such as US, UK, China etc have drafted clear cut rules with respect to Internet addressing mechanisms and such rules are being formulated & implemented at various stages by several developing countries.
.IN Domains
With the above in mind, the Department of Information Technology (DIT), Government of India recently released the revised Domain Name Registration Policy in India. The Policy states that "For websites and portals belonging to the government departments and institutions, it should be made mandatory to register their domain name in country code top level domain so that it truly reflects the national identity of the portal/websites". In India, IN is the allocated country code Top Level Domain (ccTLD). DIT has appointed NIXI, the National Internet Exchange of India as the only official Registry for IN country code Top Level Domain Name.
It has been advocated by DIT that the all round adaptation on .IN Domain by Indian residents, individuals, Government entities, public service organizations and businesses will help in establishing their Indian identity in the Internet space using a short and unique Domain Name. It is widely recognized that IN Domain Name has an untapped growth potential. A proactive policy for IN Domain proliferation is expected to establish IN as a globally recognized symbol of India's growth in the area of IT. Like COM, IN can be used for e-mail, Websites, and other applications. But unlike other domains, IN is a unique symbol of India and its role in the world.
From January 11th, 2005, the registration for .IN domain names began in India with a formal launch of the service by the Hon'ble Union Minister of Communications and Information Technology Thiru Dayanidhi Maran. At a specially held function in the Capital on January 6th, 2005, the Minister personally gave away the '.IN' Domain names to some of the biggest and prominent business and media houses in the country. Thus began a sunrise period of 21 days of Domain Registrations for those entities who already had their Trademark registration for a certain name/acronym. Following the expiry of the 'Sunrise' period, unlimited domain registration in the following zones has been thrown open to the public via certain accredited registrars: .in, co.in, net.in, org.in, firm.in, gen.in (general), ind.in (individuals). However, the zones such as ac.in (Academic), res.in (Indian research institutes), gov.in (Indian government), mil.in (Indian Military) have been reserved for use by qualified organizations in India.
The procedure for registering IN domain name is simple and convenient which allows anyone to register and use IN domain names. The technology used to run the IN registry has been upgraded recently and IN names is now available for signup through a variety of Internet service providers and other registrars. More information on IN Registrations has been made available at the website http://www.registry.in.
GOV.IN Registration
As per the new Internet Domain Name Policy, NIC has to exclusively handle the Domain Name Registration for GOV.IN country level Domain. To facilitate the GOV.IN Domain Registration, NIC has set up an exclusive web site http://registry.gov.in (See the next section for details).
As per the new Internet Domain Name Policy, NIC has to exclusively handle the Domain Name Registration for GOV.IN country level Domain. GOV.IN will be reserved for registering domain names for all the Government Departments/ Institutions/ Organisations at various levels right from Central Govt, States & UTs, Districts, Blocks and Panchayats. NIC has also been providing Domain Name Registration under NIC.IN as part of their Internet services since 1995 and has around 8000 domain names already registered. Most of Government Ministries/ Departments as well as State Governments and District Administrations have registered their domains under NIC.IN domain name. Now with the instructions of Department of Information Technology, these websites have to be hosted under the 'GOV.IN' domain and NIC is providing this service Free of Cost to its users. To facilitate the GOV.IN Domain Registration, NIC has set up an exclusive web site : http://registry.gov.in. The domain name registration policies, process and eligibility requirements have also been published on the site. The site also facilitates Online Registration of 'GOV.IN' Domain Names.
The step-by-step procedure, required to be followed in order to register a 'GOV.IN' Domain for the website is enumerated below :
1. Visit the website http://registry.gov.in and carefully read the documents/guidelines pertaining to '.IN Domain Policy', 'Domain Naming Conventions' and 'GOV.IN Domain Name: Eligibility Requirements.
2. Check the Availability of the desired domain name using the online service provided on the site.
3. On confirming the availability of the desired domain name, proceed to the Online Registration Process. However, before using the Online registration process for the first time, you have to register with the website using the 'Sign Up' form available on the Home Page of the website. While filling up the form, the concerned officer shall also have to choose a password which shall be further used during Login/Sign In on the above website.
4. On receiving the 'Sign Up' details, the system shall send your Registration ID/Login ID to the same email account as specified in the 'Sign Up' form.
5. Once you have received the Registration ID/Login ID, login at http://registry.gov.in/. Register the Domain Name request using Online Registration Service.
6. After filling the requisite contact details, fill up the Name server details and submit the online registration form. Name Server Details for sites hosted on NIC's web server would be as follows: Primary Name Server nsl.nic.in 164.100.17.3, Secondary DNS Server ns2.nic.in 164.100.10.18.
7. Following the online submission of the Registration Form, an Authorization Letter in a standard format, signed by the Head of the Organization/Department has to be immediately sent to the specified address.
