---
title: "Dungarpur : Strides in IT"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2006"
pages: [7]
author: "Deepak Bhargava, Rajasthan Correspondent"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## Dungarpur : Strides in IT

District Dungarpur is named after the town of hillocks and the capital of the former princely state of Dungarpur. It is located in the southern part of Rajasthan. The town of Dungarpur itself is said to have been a Bhil ‘Pal’ or a hamlet of ‘Dungaria’, a Bhil Chieftain whom Rawal Veer SinghDev assassinated in the fourteenth century.
Ever since its inception in Dungarpur in 1988, the NIC District Centre has made its presence felt by making tremendous strides towards empowering the District Administration with IT tools not only by strengthening the district administration’s own internal process but also by increasing the efficiency and productivity of it’s staff.
Some major Projects undertaken by NIC Dungarpur include
Computer-Bus Programme (CBP)
The CBP envisages the implementation of a Computer Education Programme in schools situated in remote places. The CBP aims to provide the students with IT skills and develop an interest in school subjects. It is proposed that a bus fitted with computers with faculty onboard, operate in a “hub and spoke model”. The Learning facility will comprise the following:
1. A 55-seater bus, transformed into a computer lab for 40-50 students, with a generator facility.
2. Installation of 20 multimedia Computers on the bus with LAN cabling, a server, printer and if possible-Internet connectivity
3. Installation of an LCD Projector to conduct computer theory and demos in the classroom.
District E-Governance (CARISMA) Project
District Administration has opened 40 IT Kiosks under this project in the district for the employment generation for computer skilled unemployed youths in the district. But more importantly, CARISMA helps citizens interface with the government.
Works Monitoring System
The whole process for execution of works in different schemes are computerized, the online queries and reports are generated by which the processed data is used for the monitoring of status at any stage of work. The developed system serves as Management Information System (MIS) to improve the presentation of information in better manner for effective and better implementation of different schemes.
Relief Monitoring System
This package has quick access to the related information/data with respect to Panchayat, Gram-Panchayat and Village with quick and error- free approach on queries and reports. The developed system serves as a Management Information System (MIS) to improve the presentation of the information/data, facilitating quick Statistical analysis through online queries and reports.
Land Record Computerization (APNAKHATA)
To begin with,for all four tehsils data entry work and verification has been completed and tehsils level Land Record Computerization computer center named ‘Khata Kendras‘ started and doing the job of making Online Jamabandies & Nakals for the cultivators.
Treasury Computerization (TCS)
It compiles the district level govt. accounts under various heads for the State Finance Department. It comprises compilation of accounts, Civil & Old Age Pension payments, stamps inventory, accounting of Personal Deposit (PD) and bill passing process.
Data Depository System
The Employee’s Data Depository System for 173 DDO’s of District Headquarter State Centre has been developed for maintaining the paybill data of all the state government employees of the district in single database.
Videoconferencing and Data Communication Services
Senior Officers of different departments of Secretariat and HODs are using the VC facility to meet their officers placed in the district for getting the status of various running development schemes or ongoing projects and are utilizing their time more productively which was earlier spent in traveling.
The District LAN
The District Collectorate has been equipped with a LAN which has a number of servers & clients which are being used for various software prepared like Plan Schemes Monitoring, Grievances Monitoring, Dak Monitoring, Relief Monitoring System etc. All the major sections of the collectorate has been connected with TCP/IP connectivity for E-mail and Internet uses. Dial-up connectivity is also being provided to about 23 remote offices.
District Web-Site
A comprehensive web-site for the District, http://dungarpur.nic.in has been developed & hosted by NIC which provides comprehensive details of subjects related to the district and serves as a reliable reference source for information about the district.
Training to Government Employees
From time to time, to impart computer skills, training is imparted to employees of government departments in a number of batches on basic computer concepts and latest ICT tools. It has helped a lot in executing many ICT activities in the district.
NIC Dungarpur District Centre
Dr. B.L. Pitliya
District Informatics Officer
Sh. Vipin Khanna
District Informatics Associate
For further information, mail to deepak.bhargava@nic.in
