---
title: "e-Abhijoga :Chief Minister's Online Grievance Redressal Portal to reach the unreached"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2011"
pages: [10, 11]
author: "R.Gayatri, S. K. Panda, Dr. R. N. Behera"
section: "E-Gov Products & Services"
---

## e-Abhijoga :Chief Minister's Online Grievance Redressal Portal to reach the unreached

Government of Odisha has taken up on priority basis the e-Governance initiative to bring transparency in Public Administration and Grievance Redressal. Thus the State Government and National Informatics Centre (NIC) have jointly committed to implement e-Abhijoga Grievance Redressal Portal in the Grievance Cell of Hon'ble CM. e-Abhijoga ensures that a citizen gets speedy and transparent redressal of the grievances. It primarily aims at submission of grievances by the aggrieved citizens from anywhere, anytime. Following activities are carried out online thus reducing the physical movement, increasing the reach of Government and availability of content/services to the com-mon citizen - Lodging of the grievance by a citizen. System generated unique registration number on online submis-sion of grievances by citizens, through Internet using any Browser Interface. Acknowledgment of grievance by concerned organization. Initial assessment of grievance by concerned organization for follow up action. Forward and transfer of grievance for Redressal. Reminder and clarification by a citizen if required. Additional information sought from the citizen for timely redres-sal of grievance. Time to time status of the griev-ance to the common citizen. Redressal action and Disposal of the case. Communication of final outcome to the citizen. The entire history of the grievance is available to the Grievance cell, subordinate offices concerned and the common citizen online. This has helped in bridging of digital and content gap. Technology Used-Open Source platform and adherence to Open standards. The technology platform was carefully chosen with proven open source technologies like Linux, PHP and PostgreSQL and other proven, reliable open source tools with the objective to conform to open standards. The deployment architecture dia-gram is presented below. The web based e-Abhijoga, Odisha State Grievance Redressal Portal (http://cmgcorissa.gov.in) was launched by Hon'ble Chief Minister of Odisha Sh. Naveen Patnaik on 31st July 2010. This mega function was addressed by dignitaries like Hon'ble Ministers of PGPA, Health, Revenue & Disaster Management, Planning Co-ordination & Panchayati Raj and Chief Secretary Sh. Tarun Kanti Mishra, IAS. SIO, Odisha gave a vivid presentation about the benefits of the software. All the 30 District DIOs, Collectors and SPs participated in the event live through Video Conferencing. CM's office keeps track of the status of the grievance down the line. It is a fool proof portal which takes care of both G2C and G2B activities. MODULES Lodge Grievance: This module facilitates free online registration of grievance in the e-Abhijoga portal. Departmental users are created by the nodal officer of the department and are assigned different roles. Lodge Reminder / Clarification: This module facilitates the citizen to send reminder/ clarification. View Action Status: This unique module facilitates the citizen to monitor the progress / status of the grievance, thus enhancing transparency. Master Management: This module facilitates online creation and management of all sub-ordinate offices in the hierarchy in the grievance redressal process in the portal. Administrative Module: This module facilitates the CM's Office and other sub-ordinate Offices to study the grievance, categorize - either to take action at their end or to forward to sub-ordinate office and after receiving the action taken report- final disposal. Monitoring Desk: This module enables the CM's office to monitor the entire grievances received. It also facilitates the grievance position (disposal and pending) with sub-ordinate offices. Correspondence Letters: This module facilitates to generate and issue acknowledgement letters and final reply letter to the aggrieved citizen. Report Module: This module facilitates to generate different progress reports.
