---
title: "e-Governance Initiatives in Lakshadweep"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2013"
pages: [25, 26]
author: "Basheer Ahammed P.K."
section: "From the States/UTs"
---

## e-Governance Initiatives in Lakshadweep

Card Management System) application has been used for capturing RC data. As the existing Ration Card holds very minimal details, data collection exercise was carried out to capture maximum information possible from households. Collection and updating of bank account details of beneficiaries were also taken up for facilitating Direct Cash Transfer. Bank details of more than 85 per cent of beneficiaries are already seeded into database and the process of seeding UID will be started soon. 11. seaT aLLoTmeNT sofTwaRe The application is developed for Department of Education for allotment of seats for higher education in mainland institutions. As there are no institutions for pursuing higher studies after school education, MHRD has reserved seats in few mainland colleges for various courses such as post-metric diploma and ITI courses, graduation in different streams including professional courses and post-graduation. UT Administration has brought out its own seat allotment rules keeping compliance with merit criteria of respective universities/institutions, to ensure a fair allotment process for native students and also wards of employees from mainland serving Lakshadweep Administration. 12. LaNd RecoRds A web based application (Land Records Information System) has been developed wherein the Record of Right or RoR can be generated. Other reports like Land Register Extract, Fair Area List, Island Wise Land Holdings, Owner wise Holdings, Land Type wise Holdings, List of all landowners, Missing Survey Numbers etc. can also be generated. Integration with the online software for Registration & CollabLand software is also in progress. The software is implemented in all the 10 Revenue Subdivisions of Lakshadweep. 13. NadRs State Level launching of NADRS was done on 06th Feb 2013 by Shri V.C. Pandey, IAS, MD (LDCL) and Secretary (Animal Husbandry) Lakshadweep. All the Animal Husbandry Units including State/UT Directorate and Liaising Office at Kochi and Animal Husbandry Hospitals in islands (Bitra to Minicoy) could be virtually connected by successfully establishing the NADRS Block level network. NADRS helped in online reporting of the diseases along with keeping the record of disease cases of various veterinary centres of each island and monitoring of these disease cases from the State Project Monitoring Unit (SPMU) at Kavaratti. Training was conducted through VC for the remote locations. The lecture on various goat diseases by the scientists of Central Institute for Research in Goats, Lucknow was extended through VC on NICNET with active coordination by Shri M. Moni, former DG NIC. 14. e-mpeda (maRiNe PRoducT expoRT deveLopmeNT ageNcy) MPEDA is an autonomous body set up for the promotion of exports of seafood from the country. The Head Quarters of MPEDA is located at Kochi in the state of Kerala. The project involves the re-engineering of various activities and development and implementation of online applications. The following areas are identified and NIC Lakshadweep Unit, Kochi is executing the project: • Registration Management System • Subsidy Management System • NRCP Monitoring System (e-NRCP) • Personal, Payroll and GPF System • Pension System • Financial Management System • Asset Management System • Plant Survey • Online Farm Survey • RCMC System • Registration System for Aqua farms, Hatcheries & Feed mills • Online PHT System 15. Lakshadweep gRievaNce maNagemeNT sysTem(Lgms) Lakshadweep Grievance Management System is a web based online public grievance redressal mechanism which aims to bring in transparency and accountability in offering government services. With the introduction of LGMS, the administration is able to track, search and redress complaints in a more effective way. The key features of the project are: n Complaint Registration through helpline n Integration of Common Service Centres for citizen interface n Designated Public Grievance Officers in all departments n Department wise, category wise reports, pendency reports and other MIS 16. oNLiNe TapaL maNagemeNT sysTem-depTaRTmeNT of eLecTRiciTy As a part of implementing effective e-Governance applications for speedy transactions in offering government services, NIC Lakshadweep Islands designed and developed Online Tapal Management System for Department of Electricity. The system is designed to digitally archive the tapals received in the department, send it for officer’s perusal, mark the comments online, send the tapals to the employee concerned, acknowledge the received tapals and to move the processed tapals to respective file for processing. The system has admin controlled role menus, workflow based application design and various pendency and MIS reports. The system is seamlessly working in Department of Electricity for the last 3 years. 17. JeevaNRekha Jeevanrekha is an online application that deals with the registration of birth, still birth and death events. The application is completely developed using open source technologies and has a workflow model. The application is seamlessly running and is used by Department of Health services from 2011 onwards. The application offers local language support and certificates are issued in bilingual format. In addition to the above projects, SchoolNet, EverAlerts, BUDGETMIS, Payroll and Lakshadweep official website are developed and maintained by NIC Lakshadweep. In addition to the above projects NIC, Lakshadweep is implementing many Central projects like MGNREGA, IAY – MIS, VAHAN ,SARATHI, e-Lekha, COMPACT, CDDO2PAO, ReAlCraft, e-Courts etc. accoLades • CSI Nihilent Award –Department of Electricity bagged the CSI-Nihilent e-Governance award 2006-07 for the Best e-Governed Department • Microsoft Award - The WebSTAR project has received the “Award for Innovative Project” in the Microsoft e-Governance Awards 2006 • Manthan Award - Manthan Award in 2007
