---
title: "e-Nijukti: Online Job Portal for State Employment Mission to be Launched Soon"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2013"
pages: [47]
author: "A. K. HOTA"
section: "In the News"
---

## e-Nijukti: Online Job Portal for State Employment Mission to be Launched Soon

The unemployed youths of the state will now have a smile on their face as they need not worry to search for a job. Odisha State Employment Mission (OSEM) is going ahead to have a web-based portal for imparting skill-based training to less qualified and unskilled youths for skilled jobs like Fitter, Mali, Driver, Electrician and many more. Job seekers can apply online for getting training free of cost through the portal and can accordingly choose the training institute of the relevant sector of their choice. A candidate can get enrolled into a course offered by a Government recognized training institute of PIA (Project Implementing Agency) online. Once candidate gets enrolled and completes training as per Govt. guidelines, it becomes the responsibility of the PIA to ensure a job for the candidate. PIA has to provide jobs to at least 75% of its total strength in a training batch. This online system will facilitate job providers to recruit the trained job seekers. SMS alert is integrated through this system so that job seekers and PIA can get SMS alerts. OSEM and NIC (National Informatics Centre) are jointly working to implement this project in the state. The software is developed by NIC, Odisha State Centre with support from NIC (HQ), Labour and Employment division. Shri R S Sethi, STD, Shri S K Panda, Dy. Director General, NIC and Dr R N Behera, Sr. Technical Director, NIC and their team have put in their sincere efforts. At present, the software is all set to launch. The advice and technical suggestions from Shri M Moni, DDG are being incorporated into the system. An in-house training program was organized for the officials of OSEM, PIAs, District Employment Officers (DEOs) at NIC Odisha State Centre, Bhubaneswar from 1st February 2013 to 2nd February 2013. The Commissioner-cum-Secretary, ETET department Shri C. S. Kumar, IAS & Shri Hemant Kumar Sharma, IAS Commissioner-cum-Director, Employment are taking the lead role in making this project a grand success. In a review meeting by Chief Secretary, this online system was widely appreciated and it has been decided that other 4 departments that are doing similar type of jobs through other agencies should be made a part of NIC developed system. This Mission Critical project of Odisha is likely to be formally launched very soon.
