---
title: "e-Registration by Job Seekers in Manipur"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2015"
pages: [19, 20]
author: "M. Budhimala Devi"
section: "E-Gov Products and Services"
---

## e-Registration by Job Seekers in Manipur

The Employment Service, Manipur came into existence in 1957 and has been working closely with its Directorate of Employment as the controlling body for administration, establishment and financial supervision, under which there are nine District Employment Exchanges, Town Employment Exchanges and four other units. The project e-Registration seeks to address the common challenges faced by the job seekers while getting registered at various employment exchanges in Manipur.
The project Employment Exchange Computerization was taken up under the NeGP with funding from the Department of IT, Government of India. As a pilot, it was taken up at two districts - Imphal West and Imphal East covering three Employment Exchange offices. These two districts have the maximum number of registered unemployed candidates. Computerization has also been extended to Thoubal District Exchange Office. The online service for registration by job seekers as well as by officials for issuing the registration card is made available using CASE ver 2.0, given as a link in the state directorate portal http://employmentservicemanipur.nic.in.
Project ObjectiveS
yyDeliver services to job seekers and prospective employers in the minimum turn-around time ensuring less physical interaction with the department
yyBring the services of the Government closer to the door steps of job seekers
yyEradicate cumbersome, time consuming and non-value adding services of the department
yyDevelop interfaces among various Employment Exchanges to facilitate seamless sharing of information for better administration and governance
yyProvide efficient and real-time employment MIS to the department
Features of the Application Software
CASE ver. 2.0 (Common Application System for Employment Exchanges) was inaugurated on December 31, 2008 by the then Chief Secretary of Manipur, Shri Rakhesh. Since then it has been running successfully in the state. The CASE application was developed by NIC Delhi and customized for the requirements of Manipur in consultation with NIC Manipur. CASE modules implemented in Manipur are Registration, Renewal, Employment Statistics and Administration.
Services provided
yyOnline Registration by job seekers
yyRenewal of Registration
yyUpdation of qualifications and other details
yyEasy download of Registration Form
System Workflow
Once job seekers submit details of their qualifications choosing the exchange of his/her jurisdiction, an Acknowledgment Card along with a temporary Registration Number is generated by the system in printable format. In case registration is done by the candidate herself/himself, original documents along with the Acknowledgment Card are to be submitted to the exchange for verification within 15 days and for issuance of the signed Registration Card. The user-id and password are emailed to the registered mail-ids of the users (job seekers/officials) for future use.
Registration Status
Job seekers can also register themselves through Exchange Counters by submitting filled-in Registration Form to get the signed Registration Card.
An authorized user (Registration Clerk) of the department can log into the system and update the information of the candidates. The Employment Officer can also log into the system and verify the data submitted by the candidate. The computer-generated Registration Card signed by the Exchange Authority is issued to the candidate. The software incorporates features to update photograph and other details of the candidate
Technology used
Open Source based application in Java, J2EE
Architecture: MVC II
Framework: Struts 1.x
OS: Red Hat Enterprise Linux version 6.x
Web Server: JBOSS Application Server 5.x
Database: PostgresSQL version 8.4 or above
Major Benefits
yyThe system is available 24 x 7.
yyInstant registration status is readily available.
yyNo more record keeping and searching of job seekers manually
yyThe system reduces redundant task of manual registration and searching of records from the huge volume of data at Exchange offices.
yyLess time in registration and renewal
yyThe system facilitates greater transparency and accountability.
yyMonthly, quarterly, yearly employment statistics reports are also available on the web.
Conclusion
With computerization of the Employment Exchanges, Manipur is well on the path of elimination of human errors in data processing, making exchanges more transparent, efficient and accountable. Now, records of the Live Register and others can be maintained without any hefty costs or any threat of data loss due to natural calamities including fire hazard.
