---
title: "eHRMS: A Comprehensive Human Resource Management System"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2019"
pages: [26, 27, 28]
author: "MADHURI SHARMA"
section: "In Focus"
---

## eHRMS: A Comprehensive Human Resource Management System

HR Strength: This section provides charts related to category wise, service group wise and gender wise distribution of employees. It also provides crucial data related to an employee’s retiring and tenure of the staff. This section acts as a decision support system for employee recruitment and selection strategies in government organizations. Pendency: This part of the dashboard is dedicated to analyze the pending service requests of employees. It has metrics like the span of pendency wherein a user can drill down to understand the type of services that are pending for approval and who is it pending with. The pendency data may help increase accountability in the employees and also reduce unnecessary delays in approval of applications. HR Development: This section provides charts related to the various training and capacity building activities in an organization. It shows staff who are currently in training, various trainings taken by them in the current year etc. Training data of employees in an organization may eventually serve as a source of analyzing employee skills. This may also be critical to understand skill gaps in an organization and requirement of new training courses. eHRMS Roll-out Status: This section is extremely essential to assess various implementation activities going on in different Ministries. It is important to keep a track of number of service books scanned, employee authentication done, admin/ agency approval completed etc., across various Ministries. This helps in understanding the quantum of work pending across Ministries/ Departments. Employee Dashboard Employee dashboard provides employees with a single view of the array of services in eHRMS and enables them to access services to be availed. Besides modules, it also comprises of the following sections: Pending for approval: This shows the application requests pending for action at the employee’s end. Status of requests: This displays the status of applications submitted by the employee. They can view whether the application is approved or pending, with whom it is pending, type of application etc. Training: This displays trainings assigned by the admin to the employee. Target Users The eHRMS application touches all aspects of HR for an employee. Hence, all the stakeholders currently involved in Human Resource activities are the target users of the application. ••All government employees ••Transfer and posting controlling employees ••Promotion controlling employees ••Vigilance and penalty controlling authorities ••Administration section of each office ••Personnel section of each office ••Finance section of each office Services to Stakeholders Employees Digitized service books have increased accuracy and transparency in employees’ service books data. Employees can access their data any time and request for an update, if required. Unnecessary delays in application approval and disbursal of due benefits have also reduced. All the HR related services can be accessed via the same platform, and the pending application requests can also be tracked. The advent of eHRMS has made the HR activities for government employees seamless and hassle-free, which may result in an increase in overall employee satisfaction. Administration Employees The application has a separate role-based access for administration/ establishment employees in an organization. It has led to a drastic reduction in the amount of time and effort that was required by admin to perform their day-to-day activities. The application has simplified processes such as service book entry/ updation, organization management (section, division, post etc.), employee management (posting, transfer, change in reporting/ controlling officer, change in work status etc.) and vigilance. Each activity has witnessed an extreme improvement in efficiency with respect to time and effort, thereby reducing work load on administration offices. Mid-level Management Apart from services offered to employees, the mid-level management employees can view data related to their subordinates. The subordinate reports help approvers take informed decisions while approving/ rejecting employees’ application requests. It also helps the mid-level management employees gauge the availability of their subordinates and plan accordingly. Top-level Management The application stores employee service data in a structured form and facilitates automatic updation of service books. The structured data storage allows the application to analyze service data and illustrate them in the eHRMS dashboard. The top-level management may make use of the interactive and comprehensive data visualizations in the dashboard as a decision support system. The dashboards are crucial to provide data-driven decision-making for issues like hiring, training, financial planning, training requirement etc., in government organizations. Implementation Methodology The application has already been implemented in DoPT, and it is being used by their employees. A set of standard processes have been put in place so as to ensure that the entire process of roll-out is seamless and hassle-free. Following steps are being undertaken for the roll-out of the application: ••Nodal officer who shall be responsible for coordinating the entire process of implementation shall be identified from each Ministry/ Department. ••Roll-out managers shall be appointed, trained and deployed at the premises of organizations for handholding support. ••Organizations are registered on the eHRMS platform; separate instances are created for each organization. ••The existing service books are handed by respective admins for scanning. ••Latest employee information which is required for decision-making shall be entered into the system. ••Scanned service books are uploaded for employees legacy data. ••The employee information shall be shown to the employees for self-verification. ••After employee verification, the information shall be shown to administration division for approval. ••Service workflows are taken from the administration office, discussed and entered into the system for various services of eHRMS. ••All employees with approved service books (legacy data) can use eHRMS services such as personal information, LTC, leave, advances and tour on a day-to-day basis. ••Service books shall get updated automatically. ••e-signed pdf for each online service shall also be stored automatically. Implementation Support The Department of Personnel and Training, along with the National Informatics Centre, is facilitating the process of training and implementation of eHRMS. A demo site is available to help end users explore the software with test data. Module wise user manuals have also been prepared for ready reference of the users. In addition to the user manuals, training videos explaining the functioning of various services have been prepared for easy understanding. These support materials are available on the demo site as well as on the online site for users to view and download. To facilitate a seamless implementation, a separate manual has been drafted for roll-out managers, which is used to train them, before they are posted to different Ministries/ Departments for application roll-out. A standard operating procedure has also been prepared, stating the process of implementation in a time-bound and actionable manner. It lays down guidelines related to the scanning process, pre-requisites for implementation and stakeholders roles & responsibilities. Implementation Status The application has already completed a very successful pilot in DoPT. The services are in use by their employees, and more than 13000 applications have already been processed by the system. It has also been rolled out to 31 Ministries/ Departments with the eServicebook module currently being used. Other seven modules (Personal Information, Leave, LTC, Reimbursement, Advance, Tour and Training) shall also be implemented in a short time. The application has generated a lot of demand in government organizations. As a result, it will be soon rolled out to the Supreme Court and Delhi Development Authority. How to Access? To get hands-on experience and training, users may visit the demo site, which has been arranged for them to explore the software with test data. They may visit the URL http://ehrms.gov.in/ehrms for actual data entry. Summary The vision of eHRMS project is to: ••Provide a single source of truth of Human Resource data for all the employees of the Government of India, wherein a robust HR application is not in place. ••Bring in transformational changes in the processes, technology and mindset behind HR related service requests. ••Make the best use of emerging technologies and redefine how HR processes happen in the government organizations. ••Serve as a mode of communication for all the employees of the Government of India to facilitate a more collaborative and cross functional work space. ••Provide a platform for exchange of best practices among government employees across India. ••Enable comprehensive analysis of HR data of government employees to provide actionable insights for policy makers.
