---
title: "eOFFICE INAUGURATED AT DEPUTY COMMISSIONER OFFICE, JAMMU BY HON’BLE CHIEF MINISTER, J&K"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2014"
pages: [48]
author: "Sanjay Gupta, Jammu"
section: "In the News"
---

## eOFFICE INAUGURATED AT DEPUTY COMMISSIONER OFFICE, JAMMU BY HON’BLE CHIEF MINISTER, J&K

Shri Omar Abdullah, Hon’ble Chief Minister, J&K inaugurated eOffice Project at Deputy Commissioner Office, Civil Secretariat, Jammu on 9th of August, 2014. Under the eOffice system all the files of Deputy Commissioner Office shall be moved and disposed off online in a secure manner on NIC intranet in real time basis. Among those present during the event were Shri Nawang Rigzin Jora, Hon’ble Minister for Urban Development and ULBs, Shri Sham Lal Sharma, Hon’ble Minister for PHE, Irrigation and Flood Control, Shri Ajay Sadhotra, Hon’ble Minister for Planning & Development and Labour & Employment, among other dignitaries and officials from the State Government and NIC State Unit. At the onset of the launch ceremony, Deputy Commissioner, Jammu, Shri Ajeet Kumar Sahu, IAS, gave a brief presentation on objectives and features of eOffice and also explained about the implementation strategy and time line. He informed that till date about 770 files have been converted into digital format and more than 11000 receipts have been digitized and are moving within the office electronically. He has informed that almost all sections of DC Office, Jammu have started using eOffice. The project has been executed with the technical support from NIC and NICSI. Deputy Commissioner Jammu apprised the participants that eOffice has number of integrated features on a single platform which in cludes movement of electronic files and receipts, PIS for officers/officials, KMS, CAMS, etc. Immediately after the presentation Hon’ble Chief Minister opened the eOffice URL http://dcjammu.eoffice.gov.in. The Hon’ble CM appreciated the efforts of the project implementing team headed by Shri Ajeet Kumar Sahu, IAS Deputy Commissioner, Jammu under whose able guidance the project could be started. He desired that e-office needs to be implemented in other District and State Government Offices to achieve e-Governance objectives. Soon after the conclusion of the launch ceremony, Deputy Commissioner Jammu thanked Shri Abhay Kumar, State Informatics Officer as well as Shri Sanjay Gupta, DIO, NIC Jammu and his team for their untiring efforts in making eOffice a reality in DC Office Jammu and expressed his interest in replicating this in other line departments. Assistant Commissioner Development, Jammu was also asked to take matter with NIC to get leased line connectivity in his premises for getting hooked to eOffice for more efficient and transparent office functioning.
