---
title: "Geneva Internet Voting (Switzerland)"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2007"
pages: [32]
author: null
section: "International e-Gov Update"
---

## Geneva Internet Voting (Switzerland)

The State of Geneva has developed a remote voting application using the web under the guidance of the Swiss federal government. Voting via the net has been implemented after 10 years of positive experience with paper-based remote voting (postal voting). Nine official ballots have been organized so far for election as well as referendum. All the equipment relative to eVoting is connected to a specific strand of the State network and separated from it by a firewall. The State network is separated from the public and internet network by several firewalls. The machine structure is camouflaged. Direct access to the database servers containing the eBallot box is impossible. So, this internet voting being centralized is easy to monitor and audit. As per the Geneva Government, at present the ballot conducted over the three channels (polling station, post and internet) costs 7.5% more than a ballot without internet and there are another 5.5% of internal costs. But, as the number of e-voters increase, the cost will decrease. 30'000 e-Votes (27% of all cast votes based on 50% turnout) are enough to offset the extra costs generated by internet voting, as per the government. As security measures, the Geneva govt. has established an 11-rule long catalogue based on the international and national law covering elections. This catalogue includes points like Voter ID must be protected; voters must have a single vote, etc... The Geneva Govt. has developed an approach in which, when a browser wants to establish a communication with the e-voting server, it has to do it according to our conditions and following the security rules. The e-voting project that is managed at three levels: operational, political at the Geneva level and politico-operational at the federal level expects to receive a great response from the “new-users.”
