---
title: "Haridwar: Demystifying Haridwar with use of ICT"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2013"
pages: [30, 31, 32]
author: "Anshu Rohatgi, Sanjay Singh, Mahavir Rawat"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## Haridwar: Demystifying Haridwar with use of ICT

Haridwar, the paradise for nature lovers, presents a kaleidoscope of Indian culture and civilization. The word ‘Haridwar’ or ‘Hari-ka-dwar’ literally means ‘Gateway to God’. River Ganga, one of the major rivers of northern India, worshipped as a Goddess, runs through the district making Haridwar a favorite destination for tourists and pilgrims. The district is spread in an area of about 2360 sq. kms with a population of little above 19 lakhs (as per 2011 census). It is subdivided into three tehsils and six development blocks for administrative purposes.
Changing with the modern times, the city of Haridwar is fast developing into an ICT gateway with the adoption of various e-Governance initiatives that have redefined the government-citizen interaction, making it simpler and easier. The district unit of National Informatics Centre and the administration has joined hands together to roll out efficient IT-based service delivery to the citizens in areas of public grievances, court cases, land records and issuance of various certificates.
CITIZEN CENTRIC SERVICES
e-Janadhar (http://ejanadhar.uk.gov.in): It provides a single-window system to the citizens of the district with a facility to apply for various certificates such as caste, domicile, character, income, status (or hasiyat) etc. at the collectorate or tehsil offices. The major aim of the project was to give hassle free, transparent and timely services to the people within stipulated time-frame and provide them with a tool to track the progress of their application over Internet.
Samadhan (http://samadhan.uk.gov.in): It is a web-based system for people to register their complaints through the Internet. State Directorate and District Administration monitor all the complaints/ public grievances submitted by the citizens and dispose them within the specified time-frame. SMS services have been integrated with the system to assist people in tracking the status of their application using mobile phones.
SACHIN KURVE District Magistrate, Haridwar Information Technology plays a vital role in providing good governance. District administration Haridwar with the help of NIC has implemented many e-Governance projects like e-Janadhar, MG-NREGA, Samadhan, e-Court, Computerization of Land Record etc for providing better services to the citizens. I hope and believe that NIC will keep up its good work and continue to provide us with technical expertise for implementation of e-Governance projects.
Computerization of Land Records (Dev-Bhoomi) (http://devbhoomi.uk.gov.in): The land records computerization in Haridwar has two distinct components. The citizen-centric land records website (Dev-Bhoomi) that allows the citizens to view the details of their land holdings (Khataunies) on anywhere, anytime basis using Internet. One can even search by owner’s name or khata numbers after selecting the concerned village, tehsil and district. In order to make it more convenient and user-friendly the website has been developed in local languagae ‘Hindi’. With the new system the farmers do not have to contact lekhpals or patwaries to obtain the details of their land holdings.
The second component is computerization of land records at tehsil level. Bhulekh Centres have been established in all the three tehsils of the district and the citizens or farmers can visit these centres to obtain a signed computerized copy of the Khatauni or Record-of-Right (RoR). Since its implementation more than 6 lakh RoRs have been distributed to the citizens.
District Court Computerization (e-Court): The court computerization was initiated with the implementation of Case Information System (CIS) in the District Court, Haridwar that facilitates filing of cases through JSC, case registration, updation of daily proceedings by court officials, statistical reports, query and generation of cause list which is in turn uploaded on the judiciary website http://dchar.uk.gov.in along with the judgments. The necessary infrastructure has been created with establishment of server room, network connectivity and JSC at Civil Court Complex, Roorkee. Extensive training has been provided to the court officials and registration of new cases has been started.
Core Treasury System (CTS): CTS has been implemented in the District Treasury Office Haridwar, Treasury Office, Roorkee and Sub-Treasury Haridwar and Laksar. All treasuries are connected through dedicated leased line using state-wide area network (SWAN) to state data centre. Employees and Pensioners can get instant information through http://ekosh.uk.gov.in by using their login and password. The system also helps the DDOs in reconciling the receipt and payment details with treasury figures.
Election Computerization: NIC, Haridwar has always played an important role during the Lok Sabha, Vidhan Sabha and Local Body Elections. Deployment of polling personnel & counting personnel after randomization is carried out as per Election Commission of India (ECI) guidelines during the election period. Software has been developed for EVM randomization and the district centre also facilitates and ensures online transmission of 'counting and results data' to the Election Commission of India (ECI), and State Election Commission at the time of elections.
Transport Computerization: The VAHAN & SARATHI application software has been implemented in ARTO office, Haridwar, for vehicle registration and issuance of driving license respectively.
National Animal Diseases Reporting System (NADRS): Under the project necessary ICT infrastructure has been installed at office of Chief Veterinary Officer and block offices for online data entry through the centralized web application. Training programs were conducted on computer basic and application software for the participants.
MGNREGA: The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act project has been successfully implemented in all six blocks of the district. All the six blocks have completed the offline data entry and are now carrying out the entries in an online mode on regular basis.
ICT SERVICES
Network Services: The NIC District Centre, Haridwar is connected with 34 Mbps OFC (Optical Fiber Cable) for Internet, Email, and Video Conferencing. A 100 node Local Area Network (LAN) has been established in the collectorate connecting all the sections and offices. Post Office Haridwar, Rishikesh and Pollution Control Board Roorkee are also using NICNET services through leased line connectivity.
All the tehsils and blocks of Haridwar have been connected over Uttarakhand SWAN, which is currently working as the backbone network for all e-Governance projects of the state. Large number of horizontal connections have been provided through SWAN network to local government departments including - district treasury and sub-treasuries, commercial tax offices, e-Janadhar centers, land record centers, sub-registrars offices etc.
District Official Website (http://haridwar.gov.in): The official website of district is designed & maintained by the NIC District Centre in coordination with the district administration. The detailed information including district profile, history, important phone no., helpline, RTI, educational institutes etc available on the website.
In addition to these, many other state and national level projects have been implemented in the district to extend the benefits of IT to the common man. These projects are fast changing the life of citizens in the district and establishing Haridwar as the Gateway to IT powered city.
