---
title: "Haryana State"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2020"
pages: [4, 5, 6, 7]
author: "SARBJEET SINGH"
section: "From the States"
---

## Haryana State

Being the land of KARMA, Haryana, though a geographically small State, is the most happening state of India. NIC Haryana was established in 1988 at Haryana Civil Secretariat with its offices in every District of the state to percolate the ICT in the state. Since then NIC Haryana has taken long leaps to support the State. Today, NIC Haryana with its offices at Haryana Civil Secretariat, Haryana New Secretariat, CM office, State Finance Department, Punjab and Haryana High court, Software development lab at Panchkula, FCR Software Development Lab, Excise and Taxation, Directorate of Enforcement, and 22 Districts, plays a pivotal role for spearheading e-Governance initiatives in the State. NIC Haryana State unit earned a distinguished place by receiving 96 awards.
Digital technology has become the backbone of governance and administration enabling services and schemes to be directly delivered to the citizens. Govt. of Haryana has begun innumerable ICT initiatives that bring services closer to the citizens and enable citizens to reach out to Government with ease. NIC Haryana has provided the technology backbone and development support for these innumerable ICT initiatives. There comes a time when the penetration of ICT in governance has become deeper and stronger in the Covid-19 and the emerging post-Covid-19 era. Carrying forward the vision of Digital India, NIC Haryana State Centre is the leading solution provider of ICT services in the State.
I thank NIC Haryana for their premier applications such as SARAL portal, a one-stop point for citizens to access over 600+ services and schemes, WebHALRIS, which enables the registration of property and providing land records, eOffice, for a paperless solution to Government functioning and IFMS and HRMS the efficient systems for payroll and human resources management. Haryana has also had the distinction of presenting a fully digital budget this year.
During Covid-19, NIC stepped to the forefront developing at a rapid pace applications to support the State Government in providing succour to the people distressed during the lockdown and also to reach Government support to citizens in need.
Core Infrastructure Services
Apart from providing the support for design, development, implementation of integrated software solutions, the State office is also providing the following key infrastructural support to the state government:
NIC Haryana State Data Centre
State-of-the-art Cloud infrastructure at NIC Haryana State Data Centre with 1056 cores 421 TB of storage has been put in place for hosting key initiatives of the state.
NICNET/ NKN Connectivity
Redundant 10 Gbps connectivity at NIC Haryana INoC for providing Internet connectivity to 3500 Haryana Government offices in the State. SWAN has been integrated with NKN at the district level. All the 22 Districts of State and the State Data Centre established by the State are connected with 1 Gbps/ 34 Mbps fiber with state HQ. 37 Institutes of Higher learning (NIT, IIM, State Universities, Central Universities, and Research Institutes) connected to high bandwidth network with network speeds of 100 Mbps to 1 Gbps. Separate Inter-District links have been established to provide network redundancy at the District level
E-Mail
Support for more than 30,398 e-Mail addresses for the Haryana government is being provided on NIC e-Mail
Video Conferencing Facilities
Total 56 VC studios have been set up in Haryana under NICNET, at Haryana Civil Secretariat (5 studios), Haryana New Secretariat (2 studios), All the District HQs (42 studios, Two each at every DHQ), Various Government Buildings, Bhawans (7 studios). Support for “Anywhere- Anytime basis VC” during Covid-19 through desktop/ laptop/ mobile/ tablet was provided by State Government Ministers/ Officers. Total 5020 VC sessions have been held (From March 2018 to September 2020) in which 5371 sites participated.
Meghraj Cloud
Providing websites hosting support on Meghraj Cloud.
ICT Initiatives in the State during current year
SARAL(Simple, All Inclusive, Real Time, Action Oriented, Long lasting portal) http://saralharyana.gov.in
SARAL facilitates aligning with Digital India’s vision of a faceless, paperless and cashless service delivery model. SARAL has been developed on Service Plus Framework and aims to transform citizen service delivery in Haryana through complete digitization of over 600+ services of more than 38 departments. At present 542 Schemes and services cutting across 39 departments/ boards/ corporations have been brought online on Antyodaya SARAL portal with SMS/ email-based Antyodaya SARAL Alert and Feedback System implemented. A comprehensive dashboard allows department officials as well as the public to view compliance with Right to Service (RTS) timelines at State and District levels. SARAL Tracking System has been established for helpline operators who respond to the queries raised by citizens regarding the status of applications. More than 25,000 are being processed through 154 SARAl Kendra and 6000+ CSCs in the state. Being the configurable framework this has played important role in service delivery during the Covid-19 peak period when the development of service in 6-8 hours was need of the hour.
Web-HALRIS (Haryana Land Records Information System)
Web-HALRIS is a complete integrated workflow-based system of Land record components implemented in all the 143 Tehsils/ sub-Tehsils. Major modules included in WEB-HALRIS are Deed Registration, Jamabandi, Mutation, Khasra Gridawari, and Reports, etc. This system provides facility for Appointment for Deed Registration, Integration of Deed Registration and land Records, Online Mutations and preparation of New Jamabandi. Registration system integration with e-GRAS for E-Stamping facilitate citizen to generate stamp paper online and online verification/ defacement of stamps during the registration process. To eradicate the fraudulent registration and registration in unauthorized colonies, this system has been integrated with Town and Country Planning, HUDA, HSIIDC, Urban Local Bodies, and the forest department. A tablet-based app e-Girdawari has also been implemented for online Khasra Gridawari. For the public, https://Jamabandi.nic.in portal has been launched to get a copy of land records and other information related to land records and Deed Registration. Scanned copies of Mutations and registered deeds are also available on the portal. The system supports 3000+ registration, 10,000+ Nakals, and 2000 mutations per day.
GIS based Grievances Management System along with SWACHH HARYANA mobile App for Citizens for grievances in Urban Areas
This is a workflow-based system for lodging grievances under 11 categories by citizens and their redressal in a time-bound manner. Leveraging the Bhartmap GIS framework of NIC and using GIS layers of Municipality, Municipality Zone, Municipality Wards, this system automatically forwards the grievance category-wise to concerned Vendor/ Municipal Nodal officers and also navigates them to the location of grievance. SWACHH HARYANA mobile App for Citizens to lodge grievances and track status. Mobile App has been provided for Grievance Resolvers, the Municipality/ Vendor Officials responsible for the actual resolution of the grievance in the field, and a comprehensive Grievances Management System for the backend operations for Municipality/ Vendor Nodal Persons was put in place.
Social Security Pension Schemes through DBT
NIC Haryana has been providing core IT software support to the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment for maintaining a centralized database of more than 28 lacs beneficiaries. These beneficiaries are scattered under 10 social security pension schemes namely Old Age Samman Allowance, Widow Pension, Disability Pension, etc. Online rights for Up-keeping of beneficiaries data, the addition of new beneficiaries, flagging of ineligible and dead beneficiaries are with respective DSWOs in all 21 districts. It has been integrated with RGI death data to flag dead beneficiaries, with UIDAI for demo auth at the time of enrolment and name correction, with SARAL and eDisha portal for new applications, verification, and approvals. From September 2020 it has been integrated with PFMS and account-based payment.
Haryana Rozgar portal (http://rozgar.hrex.gov.in)
This platform aims to link job seekers in Haryana to multiple and relevant job opportunities. In the last five years data of 37,94,930 job seekers, Students, ITI pass out, Candidates appeared in HSSC, etc. from 15 various Government Departments, Colleges, Training Institutes ported into the system. 17955 Establishments and 13 Aggregators are also registered in the portal who can search and download candidate’s details as per various criteria like Qualification, experience, age, geographical location, etc. A Call Centre has also been established to provides career guidance and counseling to the students. Approximately 25,00,000 calls have been made through IVRS and Call Centre to enrich the database with employment status, relocation preference, expected salary, etc.
Online Admission Platform for admission in undergraduate Course https://dheadmissions.nic.in
Because of the ongoing Covid-19 Pandemic, ensuring the safety of the students, an online admission platform for admission in Undergraduate Courses in Government, Government Aided and Self-finance colleges for the new academic session has been launched in collaboration with the Higher Education Department to facilitate students to get admission while staying at their homes. With this platform, now the students will be able to complete their entire admission process while sitting at home. Integrated with CBSE, Haryana Board of school education, Aadhaar, and SARAL, this system for online verification has reduced the efforts of the state government to a large extent. Integration with the bank has been done for making payment for admission online. For admission in more than 330 colleges, 166277 students registered themselves for 74 courses and 154805 applications were processed in the current session.
Parivar Pehchan Patra https://meraparivar.haryana.gov.in
One of the first-of-its-kind initiatives, this system aims to create a family database of the whole state of Haryana. Citizens can visit the nearest Atal Sewa or SARAL Kendra to get details of their families updated. Once Golden record is created, all schemes and services which are intended for a family will be delivered through this database. Family ID for 59 lakh families was collated from various sources and verification of more than 24 lakh families has been verified through school camps and booth level committees. This database will be used for proactive delivery of the services based upon socioeconomic and demographic parameters of the family. This database will provide the live population of the state at any given point in time and will trigger changes to various State applications when every there is a change in family structure based upon birth, death, and marriage registration.
Meri Fasal Mera Bayora https://fasal.haryana.gov.in
This portal enables farmers to self-report crop information along with land and bank account details. Apart from this, a farmer can visit the nearest CSC (Common Service Centre) with his details and get punched absolutely free. The system is integrated with Parivar Pehachan Patra, land records to verify the ownership and with the bank to ensure the bank details. After initial information by farmers, the information is matched with the data with Girdawari, Satellite Image, and survey conducted by Agriculture Department. The mismatch of details is detected on three mismatched records. Mismatched villages are physically verified by DC, ADC, SDM, Tehsildars, and Naib-Tehsildars. On the portal, the farmer can schedule the time when he wants to bring the crop for procurement based upon which automatic gate-pass is generated. e-Kharid system of Mandi Board for procurement has been integrated with MFMB via APIs to fetch real-time information of registered farmers along with crop and Bank account details. Total 7,72,643 farmers registered themselves with crop area 4456070.19 Acre.
Litigation Management System http://lmshry.gov.in
Litigation Management System provides a robust mechanism for efficiently monitoring the more 4,23,891 court cases in which state government is a party. Being the only state in India who have integrated with High Court and subordinate courts for fetching the data for newly instituted cases, court proceeding, online availability of paper books and vetting of cases reply to be filed in court helped state government to reduce COCP (CIVIL ORIGINAL COONTEMPT PETITION) cases and monitor the performance of lawyers hired by the state government for pleading. Dashboard Reports for each Department Administrator/ Branches, SMS, and email alerts are used for timely filing of reply.
NIC VC Solution
In view of maintaining social distance guidelines and to stay connected during Covid-19 pandemic, the demand for video based meetings is on the rise exponentially. NIC Haryana has developed this open source based comprehensive VC solution for NIC so that the dependencies on the commercial VC applications can be minimized. Hosted within the NIC Domain, this in-house product nullifies the security and data leakage threats unlike the other proprietary VC solutions. It is completely secure, scalable and easy to use and having good quality video/ audio streaming, but require minimal infrastructure.
• Personalized Web Room for registered users
• Facility to join Registered Users Web Room
• Facility to create public/ private groups
• Generation of Guest Link with Secure PIN for Un-registered Users with/ without Presentation Rights
• VC Recording and download
• SMS and Email Alerts
• Progressive Web Application (PWA)
• Shared Document Editing through Ether pad
• Third Party Application Integration facility
• Live streaming on YouTube
Paperless submission of bills through Integrated Financial Management System (IFM & HRMS)
Haryana government discontinued the submission of Physical Vouchers for salary bills. The DDOs no longer have to visit the treasuries for submission of physical vouchers, receiving EPS Pay orders, going to banks for submission of Pay orders for getting payments. Bills are digitally signed and submitted online to treasuries by the DDOs. Pay orders are also signed digitally and sent to the bank online only. The paperless system launched by the state government has ushered a new era in the field of disbursement of salaries through treasuries. Soon other bills are also expected to do away with Physical Voucher paving the way for Paperless Treasuries.78347 paperless bills of salary were passed from treasuries in September.
End-to-End Computerization of Targeted Public Distribution System in Haryana
ePDS has been implemented across the State covering for Online Ration Cards Management, Allocation, Supply Chain Management, Ration distribution through PoS devices at FPS using Aadhaar based authentication using both Cash and Cashless (successfully carried out in Ambala and Panchkula on a pilot basis) modes. This system caters to more than 1,24,00,000 beneficiaries. Due to the digitization of beneficiaries, Haryana was the first state to become Kerosene Free and implement portability of ration cards. The computerization of ePDS has resulted in transparency in the System and saving to the state exchequer by carrying out de-duplication of beneficiaries.
Online Medico-Legal Reporting with integration with Forensic/ Food/ Drug labs and Police (http://medleaprhry.gov.in)
The MedLEaPR is a workflow-based system, a web-based centralized system for preparation of MLR/ PMR, as per legally approved forms related to MLRs and PMRs. which provides requisite access security based on roles & responsibilities of concerned Doctors, health institutes, etc. The software is generic and has been implemented in Haryana, Punjab, Chandigarh(UT), Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Madhya Pradesh. The software also integrates the Forensic laboratories and other laboratories i.e. implemented at FSL, CFSL, Food Lab, Drug Lab, Chemical Lab, Excise Lab, etc. to examine the samples pertaining to court cases/ Police cases. Intimation to all stakeholders by SMS/ Email on the status of the sample is an added feature of this software. It is also integrated with CCTNS and e-Detailed Accident Report (e-DAR) for Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, New Delhi.
Online Drug Inventory and Supply Chain Management System http://dpmuhry.gov.in
Online Drug Inventory and Supply Chain Management System (ODISCM) is a workflow-based system developed to improve efficiency and effectiveness of Procurement system and Distribution System, this system facilitates Centralized order placing, dashboard based online monitoring of all activities at each level, tracking of vendor activities like preparation of Supply Order, Shipment and Monitoring of Drug consumption pattern. This system ensures streamlining the distribution of drugs to institutions and ensures availability of drugs at all times, strengthening the system of Quality Controls, over drugs procurement and distribution according to the new drug policy of the Government of Haryana. Dashboard for all concerns to monitor and evaluate purpose.
Implementation of the e-Office
The State launched the e-Office system for the electronic movement of files related to 58 Government Departments, major Departments/ Corporations besides the offices of the Chief Minister and Chief Secretary. The state is now in process of complete rollout in all State Government offices by 25th December 2020, which is also celebrated as Good Governance Day.
Accolades
• “Antyodaya Saral Haryana” Project bagged the GOLD Award in the category of ‘Excellence in providing Citizen-Centric Delivery’ in 23rd National Conference on e-Governance organized by the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, Government of India (DAR&PG) in Mumbai on February 8, 2020
• The National Award was conferred to District Hisar by the Hon’ble President of India Sh. Ram Nath Kovind at the 10th National Voters’ Day celebrations on Saturday, January 25, for IT Initiatives on Best Electoral Reforms during Lok Sabha -2019
• District Hisar was conferred State Award by His Excellency, the Governor of Haryana, Shri Satyadev Narayan Arya, on National Voters’ Day celebrations on Saturday, January 25, 2020, in Chandigarh
• NIC-Haryana State Centre received CSI Award of Appreciation for Progressive State in eGovernance (Haryana State), on 17th January 2020 as part of the 53rd CSI Annual Convention at KiT University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
• NIC-Haryana State Centre received CSI Award of Excellence for Litigation Management System, on 17th January 2020 as part of the 53rd CSI Annual Convention at KIIT University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
• NIC-Haryana State Centre received CSI Award of Recognition for PMKISAN State Portal, on 17th January 2020 as part of the 53rd CSI Annual Convention at KiiT University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
• NIC-Haryana State Centre received CSI Award of Appreciation for Component-based Web-HALRIS, on 17th January 2020 as part of the 53rd CSI Annual Convention at KiiT University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
• NIC-Haryana State Centre received CSI Award of Excellence for Meri Fasal Mera Byora, on 17th January 2020 as part of the 53rd CSI Annual Convention at KiiT University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
• Business World Digital India Award 2019 for Component-based Web-HALRIS in 2019
• Gem of Digital India Award for e-panchayat in the year 2019.
• CSI- NIHILENT e-Governance Award of Excellence for SARAL Haryana in 2019
• Platinum Award under Web Ratna to District official website of District Kurukshetra- District Category in 2019
• Awarded Gold Award under CollabDEV Category to NIC District Jind for ‘Discussion Board’ module for Enhancement of Digital NIC Platform in TechGov Awards 2019
• Awarded Gold Award under CollabDEV Category to NIC District Hisar for ‘Web Service Portal’ module for Enhancement of Digital NIC Platform in Tech- Gov Awards 2019
• Awarded Silver Award under CollabDEV Category to NIC District Kaithal for PAC Process’ under ‘Project Repository Information System Management (PRISM)’ sub-track in TechGov Awards 2019.
Way Forward
Well-tuned with the national vision of Digital India, NIC Haryana State Centre is playing a pivotal role in making Haryana State an impact at the national level. Many path break projects developed in collaboration with the state have been adopted at the national level and other states. By signing MOU for S3WAAS by the state government with NIC, all the static portals departments/ board cooperation will be developed on GIGW 3.0 guidelines. With the establishment of the Parivar Pehchan Patra (PPP) platform all the services of the state government will be reconfigured to be delivered based upon PPP.
