---
title: "HINDI PAKHWADA CELEBRATIONS AT NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE (14th- 28th September, 2013)"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2014"
pages: [46, 47, 48]
author: "Dr. Vandana Sharma DDG & Ms. Mridula Jain, Hindi Officer"
section: "Hindi Pakhwada"
---

## HINDI PAKHWADA CELEBRATIONS AT NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE (14th- 28th September, 2013)

Hindi Pakhwada was observed at NIC Headquarters from 14th September 2013 to 28th September 2013. Hindi Pakhwada was also observed at NIC State Units. During the event, seven different competitions were organized in Hindi. Alike previous years, this year too, Hindi typing, dictation, essay-writing, speech, calligraphy, extempore etc were organized. Active participation from officials was observed for all the competitions. Shri A. Mohan, then Director General of NIC, appealed to all officials of NIC Hqrs. and State units to carry out their maximum official work in Hindi language and urged them to continue with this effort. Inaugurating the competition, Hindi Officer Ms. Mridula Jain stated that she is overjoyed to find out that large number of officials are participating in the event. During the closing ceremony, Dr. Vandana Sharma, DDG appreciated the efforts put forth by the employees and the way in which the Hindi Pakhwada was celebrated. She expressed her delight on seeing the overwhelming response from the employees. She stressed on the need of paying more attention on the use of Hindi in day to day work as it is easy to work in Hindi. Moreover, working in Hindi language is everyone’s constitutional duty, which should be followed religiously. She also informed that this time, instead of five, seven prize categories have been kept to encourage participation from employees and officials. The Hindi Pakhwada concluded with a vote of thanks from Ms. Mridula Jain, Hindi Officer to Dr. Vandana Sharma DDG for participating in dictation competition and sparing some time from her busy schedule, thus encouraging other participants to work in Hindi.

GLIMPSES OF HINDI PAKHWADA CELEBRATIONS AT THE NIC STATE/UT UNITS
In the NIC State Units, Hindi Pakhwada has been celebrated with equal enthusiasm. During this period several competitions were organized and prizes were distributed to the winners. In Kerala, Hindi Pakhwara (14th - 28th September, 2013) was marked by six competitions namely Translation, Memory Test, Picture Composition, debate on 'Internet ke fayade aur nuksaan', Elocution on 'Nari ka Samman’ and Poem recitation. Total six prizes were given for each competition. State Informatics Officer delivered a message on the importance of use of Hindi for National integration and distributed the prizes and mementos. In Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Hindi Pakhwada (14th - 28th September 2013) was inaugurated by Shri Mahadevya, Executive Engineer, Central Public Works Department, Port Blair. Hindi coordinator, Shri Gautam Gupta, PSA, gave a power-point presentation on the current scenario on the use of official language at NIC, Port Blair. In Mizoram, Hindi Pakhwada was organized on 09 September, 2013 and commenced with the inaugural speech from State Informatics Officer. After that, quiz competition and debate were organized. Subsequently, the State Hindi Committee members- Shri Jayant Kumar Nath and Shri Praveen Kumar expressed their views. Hindi Pakhwara in Madhya Pradesh (14th - 28th September 2013) was marked by Hindi essay-writing, Hindi Translation, noting & drafting and speech competitions and the winners were awarded with cash prizes and certificates by Shri M Vinayak Rao, State Informatics Officer. In Lakshadweep Islands, the event (14th-28th September 2013) commenced with welcome address from Shri Syed Mohammad Nizar, DIO. Mrs. Shahina Begam, Systems Analyst and Hindi Coordinator conducted poetry recitations. Later, the employees participated in live webcasted Hindi Day celebrations at Delhi via video conferencing. In Chandigarh, during the event (26th & 27th September, 2013), speech, essay-writing, dictation and calligraphy competitions were organized. Each competition had three categories and for each category, cash prizes and certificates were distributed. In Meghalaya, Hindi Pakhwada (14th -28th September 2013) started with inaugural address from Shri Timothy Dkhar, SIO. During the event, speech, essay-writing, calligraphy and dictation competitions were organized. Hindi Pakhwada in Jharkhand (1st - 14th September, 2013) was marked by various activities such as essay writing, extempore competitions etc. All district personnel were involved in the program through video conferencing and participated in the competitions. In Gujarat (14th-28th September, 2013) calligraphy writing and speech delivery contests were organized. The event ended with vote of thanks from Shri Rajneesh Mahajan, State Informatics Officer and DDG. In Arunachal Pradesh (September 19, 2013), the event started with inaugural address from Shri Taso Habun, SIO. All employees were directed to use Hindi typing software and related information from http://rajbhasha.nic.in/. Shri Samir Rajan , DIO delivered a speech on “Manav Jeevan Mein Khelon Ka Mehatv”. Dictation competition was also organized during the event. Hindi Pakhwada in Rajasthan (02/09/2013) was marked by competitions such as calligraphy in Hindi, Hindi quiz, Hindi extempore etc. Addressing the event, Ms. Indu Gupta, SIO congratulated the winners of various competitions and stressed on enhanced use of Hindi in everyday official work. In Assam, Hindi Pakhwada (23rd – 27th September, 2013)b was inaugurated by Shri Deepak Goswami, SIO. Hindi Paragraph-writing & Hindi Poem Recitation competitions were held and were judged by Shri Badri Yadav, Inspection Officer (Implementation), Dept. of Official Language, Guwahati. Antakshri, solo song, duet song, drama and violin play were also organized during the event. In Manipur, Hindi Pakhwada (21st - 28th September, 2013) was inaugurated by Prof. Dr. Hajarimayum Subdini Debi, Head, Department of Hindi, Manipur University. On this day, story and poetry reading competitions were organized. Speech competition was organized on the closing day of the event followed by prize distribution. Hindi Pakhwada was celebrated at NIC, State Centre, Lucknow on 19th and 20th September 2013. During this period, various Hindi competitions such as the essay-writing, dictation, drafting and calligraphy competitions were organized. Hindi Pakhwada was observed in Punjab from 14th to 28th September, 2013 during which speech, essay, dictation and calligraphy competitions were organized. Prizes and certificates were distributed to the winners. Hindi Pakhwada in Uttarakhand (14th to 28th September, 2013) was marked by essay-writing, question answer, quiz and dictation competitions. At price distribution ceremony, Dr. S.P. Kulshreshtha, SIO addressed all the participants on “Hindi Bhasha ka Mahatv”. Hindi Pakhwada in West Bengal (27-09-2013) included programs in Hindi such as quiz, calligraphy, Hindi extempore etc.. Addressing the event, Shri Kamal Kumar Podhar, SIO encouraged the usage of Hindi language in day-to-day official work. Winners of various competitions were felicitated in the end.
