---
title: "Hon’ble President of India dedicates PARV to simplify Plant Variety Registration"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2023"
pages: [42]
author: "Shailendra Saxena, NIC-HQ"
section: "In the News"
---

## Hon’ble President of India dedicates PARV to simplify Plant Variety Registration

On September 12, 2023, during the ‘First Global Symposium on Farmers’ Rights,’ Hon’ble President of India, Smt. Droupadi Murmu, unveiled PARV (Portal to Apply for Registration of Plant Varieties). This user-friendly portal was meticulously designed and developed by the Agricultural Informatics Division of NIC Delhi for the ‘Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Right Authority,’ a part of the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare. The launch of PARV took place during the inaugural ceremony of the ‘First Global Symposium on Farmers’ Rights,’ organized by the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA), FAO, Rome, and hosted by the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Government of India. The event unfolded on September 12, 2023, at the ICAR Convention Centre, NASC Complex, PUSA, New Delhi, and saw the presence of several dignitaries. Hon’ble Union Minister for Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Shri Narendra Singh Tomar, and Hon’ble Minister of State for Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Shri Kailash Choudhary, graced the occasion. Also present were MoA&FW Shri Manoj Ahuja, Secretary DoA&FW, Shri T. Mohapatra, Chairperson PPVFRA, Shri Kent Nnadozie, MoA&FW Secretary ITPGRFA Rome, Dr. H. Pathak, Secretary DARE & DG, ICAR and other senior officers. PARV, available at https://app.plantauthority.gov.in, is a web-based application tailored to receive and process applications for registering new plant varieties. It caters to a wide range of stakeholders, including farmers, traditional communities, public and private seed industry players, state agriculture universities, and institutions from the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), CSIR, MoEF, among others. The online application process is designed to be hassle-free and efficient. It allows for supporting attachments and photographs and integrates seamlessly with department workflows, minimizing paperwork. Additionally, the portal offers features like online certificate generation, automatic generation of the Plant Variety Journal, a dashboard for monitoring, MIS reports, online application status tracking, and alerts through email and SMS. PARV signifies a significant leap towards simplifying and modernizing the registration of plant varieties, aligning with the evolving needs of agriculture and plant protection. It brings convenience and efficiency to stakeholders while contributing to the promotion of sustainable agriculture and the protection of farmers’ rights.
