---
title: "Hon’ble Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh Launches CM DARPAN Dashboard for Data Driven Governance"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2023"
pages: [43]
author: "Vandana Singh, Uttar Pradesh"
section: "In the News"
---

## Hon’ble Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh Launches CM DARPAN Dashboard for Data Driven Governance

In a significant stride towards enhancing transparency and efficiency in governance, the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, Mahant Yogi Adityanath, inaugurated the ‘CM DARPAN Dashboard.’ The event was also attended by the Hon’ble Deputy Chief Ministers of Uttar Pradesh, Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya and Shri Brajesh Pathak alongside other higher State and NIC officials. This innovative initiative, powered by NIC, is poised to revolutionize the way government data is collected, processed, and disseminated. The ‘CM DARPAN Dashboard’ is designed to transform complex government data into compelling visuals, making it more accessible and comprehensible for both policymakers and the public. CM DARPAN stands for “Chief Minister’s Digital Analytical and Reforms Program for Actionable Insights.” It is a comprehensive data analytics platform developed which provides a unified view of data from various government departments and agencies. The platform utilizes cutting-edge technology to convert vast and intricate datasets into user-friendly visualizations, which can be accessed through a secure and user-friendly dashboard. The CM DARPAN Dashboard brings several tangible benefits to the table. It improves decision-making, efficiency and transparency by providing policymakers with real-time, data-driven insights, enabling more informed choices. It further serves as a valuable tool for engaging citizens by providing them with a clear view of the government’s performance. Moreover, thanks to real-time monitoring and predictive analytics, it enables early detection of potential issues, allowing for timely interventions. The launch of the ‘CM DARPAN Dashboard’ is a testament to the Uttar Pradesh government’s commitment to leveraging technology for the welfare of its citizens. It marks a significant step forward in the journey towards good governance, where data is at the heart of decision-making, accountability, and public engagement. As this innovative platform is adopted and integrated further into the state’s governance framework, it is expected to evolve and expand its capabilities. The ‘CM DARPAN Dashboard’ could serve as a model for other states in India and even other countries looking to enhance their governance through data-driven insights.
