---
title: "Hon’ble Chief Minister, Kerala, Shri Pinarayi Vijayan, inaugurates Aadhaar-based Unique Thandaper System"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2022"
pages: [40]
author: "Informatics News Desk, NIC-HQ"
section: "In the News"
---

## Hon’ble Chief Minister, Kerala, Shri Pinarayi Vijayan, inaugurates Aadhaar-based Unique Thandaper System

Hon’ble Chief Minister, Kerala, Shri Pinarayi Vijayan virtually inaugurated the Aadhaar-based Thandaper System in the state. Thandaper is a unique 13-digit long unique identifier which maps the ownership of land parcels across the state. It can be generated by seeding the land owner’s Aadhaar identifier or a combination of Aadhaar identifiers (in case of joint or institutional ownership of land).
The event was held in the august presence of Shri K. Rajan, Hon’ble Minister of Revenue, Shri Antony Raju, Hon’ble Minister of Transport, Shri V. Sivankutty, Hon’ble Minister of General Education, Dr. A. Jayathilak, Additional Chief Secretary (Revenue) and Shri P. V. Mohan Krishnan, DDG & SIO Kerala. Several senior-level officials from State Revenue Department and NIC Kerala also joined the event through the NIC Video Conferencing service. In the event, Shri Antony Raju received Thandaper for his land holdings across the state by Hon’ble Minister of Revenue, Shri K. Rajan.
The module used for this system has been developed upon the bedrocks of ReLIS (Revenue Land Information System) suite of software, also facilitated by NIC.
Before Unique Thandaper, a land parcel could have multiple Thandaper numbers, had the land been registered multiple times. This led to numerous inconsistencies, such as the prevalence of Benami lands - or lands with proxy ownership. This led to difficulty in tracking property tax payments, that are expected to be addressed by this system.
As ownership information becomes more transparent, tracking and identifying excess land owned by individuals or families will become easier. The excess land can be then redistributed to the landless farmers of the State under Land Reforms Acts.
A person can simply download his Thandaper number through the Thandaper portal or Digilocker.
