---
title: "Hon'ble Minister of State for Communications and IT, Sh. Sachin Pilot Reviewed NIC, activities in Madhya Pradesh"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2010"
pages: [45, 46]
author: "Santosh Kr. Shukla, Madhya Pradesh"
section: "In the NEWS"
---

## Hon'ble Minister of State for Communications and IT, Sh. Sachin Pilot Reviewed NIC, activities in Madhya Pradesh

D URING HIS Bhopal visit Sh. Sachin Pilot, Hon'ble Minister of State for Communications and Information Technology, Government of India chaired a meeting to review penetration of ICT infrastructure & e- Governance initiatives and Services of NIC in the State of Madhya Pradesh, besides activities of BSNL & India Post. The meeting was held at BSNL Bhawan, Bhopal and attended by Sh. M. Vinayak Rao, Sr. Technical Director & SIO along with all the HoDs & associated senior officers. Sh. M. Vinayak Rao with his team accorded warm welcome to Sh. Sachin Pilot at BSNL Bhawan, Bhopal along with the Officers from BSNL & India Post. Hon'ble Minister was very keen to know the status of various projects being taken up by Government of India and NIC in the State. He was willing to know the keenness of other State Government Department in implementation of e-Governance Projects. SIO briefed on various ICT projects/applications devel- oped & implemented by NIC, Madhya Pradesh and added that GIS projects, being taken up by NIC & progressing, makes the State special in the area. SIO informed that after looking at State Education Portal & State Scholarship Portal, which are workflow based transparent systems (where public can view all the relevant information online), many other Departments, like Labour, Home, Tribal Development, etc., which hitherto didn't show much interest in ICT have also started showing keen interest in computerization and are approaching NIC for similar e-Governance projects in the State. Hon'ble Minister expressed great satisfaction & congrat- ulated on recognition and awards received for e- Governance Projects/Initiatives from various agencies dur- ing last few years. He added that Government of India will give more awards in future also for good work in ICT field for the benefit of citizen, especially rural masses. Hon'ble Minister mentioned that his expectations are very high from NIC (besides from BSNL & India Post) and wants to see that Government services are delivered to each & every citizen at their door-step without compro- mising quality of service, as Internet penetration is expect- ed to grow upto Village Panchayat level in near future. Subsequently, a Press Conference was addressed by Sh. Sachin Pilot, in which SIO, CGM, BSNL & CPMG, Post and most of the media (Electronic & Print Media) persons were present.
