---
title: "Hon’ble Chief Minister of Rajasthan launches Shala Darpan-Teachers App to bolster EduTech in the State"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2023"
pages: [44]
author: "Amit Agarwal, Rajasthan"
section: "In the News"
---

## Hon’ble Chief Minister of Rajasthan launches Shala Darpan-Teachers App to bolster EduTech in the State

On the occasion of Teachers’ Day in Rajasthan, 5th September 2023, the Hon’ble Chief Minister Shri Ashok Gehlot unveiled two user-friendly mobile apps developed by NIC Rajasthan during the state-level Teachers’ Day celebration. The event was attended by esteemed dignitaries, including the Hon’ble Minister of Education for the State Dr. Bulaki Das Kalla, Hon’ble Minister of Primary & Secondary Education, Smt. Zahida Khan, Hon’ble Minister of Higher Education, Shri Rajendra Yadav, Hon’ble Minister of Technical Education, Dr. Subhash Garg, State Informatics Officer, Shri Jitendra Kumar Verma, senior officers, and teachers. The Shala Darpan-Teacher App is a groundbreaking tool designed to streamline school management in government schools across Rajasthan. It allows teachers to effortlessly record daily student attendance and also enables them to mark their own attendance when they are present within the school premises. Additionally, the app facilitates staff leave applications. Dr. Kalla emphasized that Shala Darpan has emerged as an indispensable tool for school management in the state. Currently, it supports over 83 lakh students, more than 4 lakh staff, and various school-related functions, such as exam results, appointments, postings, admission registrations, and more, in all 70,000+ government schools in Rajasthan. This app promotes transparency and accountability within the education system, making it easier to monitor student attendance and ensure regular school attendance. Notably, the app can function offline, which is particularly convenient for rural areas. ShalaSamblan 2.0 App aims to bolster the education system in Rajasthan by providing valuable support and feedback to schools. It enables visiting officers to report feedback from any school they visit, allowing for the identification of current education system needs. The app generates tickets based on the input from inspecting officers, which can be closed after necessary actions are taken. Importantly, the mobile app functions seamlessly offline when there is no internet connectivity and synchronizes data once the internet is available. Key features of the ShalaSamblan 2.0 App include the option for officials to select schools voluntarily in addition to their assigned schools. This allows officials to focus their efforts on schools that require support the most. The app also includes features for collecting and analyzing data on academic processes, learning outcomes, and various school-related components like ICT, vocational education, and MDM (Mid-Day Meal). This data will play a pivotal role in enhancing the effectiveness of school support and guidance. The Hon’ble Chief Minister said, “These innovative mobile apps represent a significant step forward in ensuring efficient school management and support, ultimately contributing to the betterment of the education system in Rajasthan. They exemplify the state government’s commitment to harnessing technology for the benefit of teachers, students, and the education system as a whole.
