---
title: "Hon’ble Union Minister Shri Narendra Singh Tomar dedicates PM Kisan mobile app with face authentication feature to the nation"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2023"
pages: [43]
author: "Diksha Shukla, NIC-HQ"
section: "In the News"
---

## Hon’ble Union Minister Shri Narendra Singh Tomar dedicates PM Kisan mobile app with face authentication feature to the nation

On June 22, 2023, in New Delhi, the Hon’ble Minister of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Shri Narendra Singh Tomar, marked a significant milestone by launching the PM-Kisan mobile app, developed by the National Informatics Centre (NIC). This app is an integral part of the ambitious “Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi” scheme, aimed at providing essential income assistance to farmers across India. What sets this app apart is its incorporation of a cutting-edge face authentication feature, which allows farmers to complete their e-KYC remotely, without the need for OTPs or fingerprints, from the comfort of their homes. The PM-Kisan scheme is one of the largest direct benefit transfer (DBT) initiatives globally. Under this scheme, farmers receive an annual sum of Rs. 6,000 directly deposited into their bank accounts in three instalments, linked to their Aadhaar. This monumental program has disbursed over Rs. 2.42 lakh crore to the bank accounts of more than 11 crore farmers, including over 3 crore women. Even during the challenging times of the COVID-19 lockdown, PM-Kisan proved to be a steadfast companion for farmers. The newly launched PM-Kisan Mobile app is a user-friendly tool, readily available for download on the Google Play Store. Beyond income assistance, the app serves as an information hub for farmers, offering essential details related to the scheme and their PM-Kisan accounts. One notable module is the “Know Your Status” feature, allowing farmers to access their land records, check Aadhaar linking status with their bank accounts, and review the progress of their e-KYC. Speaking at the launch event, Union Minister Shri Tomar highlighted the revolutionary nature of the PM-Kisan scheme. It eliminates intermediaries, allowing the Central Government to directly provide benefits to farmers on an unprecedented scale through the use of technology. The successful implementation of this scheme is a remarkable achievement, streamlining the entire process through a user-friendly mobile app. The launch event witnessed the presence of prominent dignitaries, including the Hon’ble Minister of State, Shri Kailash Choudhary, the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Shri. Manoj Ahuja, and senior officials from the farmers’ welfare division, NIC HOG & DDG Mrs. Pratibha Lokhande, HOD & DDG Mrs. Mala Mittal, along with the NIC PM KISAN team.
