---
title: "ICT at Finance Sector in Uttar Pradesh"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2004"
pages: [16]
author: "Anshu Rohatgi, UP Correspondent"
section: "E-Governance Products & Services"
---

## ICT at Finance Sector in Uttar Pradesh

Department of Finance, UP and NIC have been working together for more than a decade. Modernization of the Revenue Sector being a top priority of the State Government, NIC UP State Unit took up the challenge of computerizing all the major activities of the Finance Department viz Budget Preparation, Allotment & Control, Treasury Directorate & District Treasuries, Pension, Pay, GPF, GIS etc. The major emphasis of the various project undertaken was to bring transparency in Government transactions, accurate and speedy accounting, proper budgeting, timely reporting and facilitating the general public with an efficient use of the latest ICT tools. ™ ITSANIC (Integrated Treasury System Application of NIC) Treasury Computerization was initiated way back in 1994-95 & since then has achieved many milestones. It is successfully implemented in all the districts of the state and provides free-of-cost anytime, anywhere data services through a web-site http://upgov.up.nic.in/uptreasuries. The website, which has the distinction of being the first official treasury website of the country is updated directly from the district treasuries using NIC’s network ‘NICNET’ It is used potentially by the Government officials, planners, economists & researchers & provides relief to our elder citizens -pensioners of the state. ITSANIC, is a user-friendly software with a modular approach. It has been developed with the objective to help the management with timely data for monitoring of expenditures on schemes and also to secure itemized control on expenditure. Some of the salient features of the software include - Remittance Accounting (CCL/DCL) Personal Ledger Accounting Pension Disbursement & Accounting Online Cheque Generation, etc ™ Budget Preparation Uttar Pradesh is one of the first states in the country to prepare a fully computerized state budget. NIC has put tremendous efforts in making the massive job of budget preparation look simple. The software has proved to be indispensable for formulating the figures of the Annual Budget, the corresponding Supplementary Budget or Vote-on-Accounts both in English and in Hindi. The software is also used for pre-budget and post budget analysis, year-wise comparative analysis, generation & printing of 6 volumes of 17 books of budget (around 4500 pages). The budget as and when kept on floor of the house is immediately made available through the directorate of budget website (http://upgov.up.nic.in/upbudget) for everyone to have a glimpse of it. The website gives budget estimates with a click of a mouse and also has a query option. ™ Pay & GPF The success of Pay & GPF software developed by NIC State Unit is awe-inspiring. Started in 1998-99, more than 30,000 offices of the state are currently using a uniform software for their Pay and GPF calculations. In addition to generating, the Paybills, Schedules, Acquittence Rolls & Pay Slips the Payroll Processing software maintains the employee data, generates Pay Arrear Bills, Monthly Retirement List, Deduction Schedules, Bonus Calculations & direct credit to bank facility. ™ Pension The Integrated Pension Management System was implemented in the year 1999 at the Pension Directorate & AD Office’s. It not only takes care of Pre Pension Processing but also generates all Master Indexes & all the Authorities (GPO, PPO, CPO) with photographs and signatures. The software facilitates Auto Calculation & Revision of Pension & Gratuity, Arrear Calculation, Pensioner Detail Maintenance & Pension Adalat Monitoring ™ Group Insurance Group Insurance Management system of NIC (GIMSNIC) software has been designed for providing the entry of GIS claims, calculation sheet and DDO wise claim register through computer at the treasury level and generating information for the Director, U.P. State Employees Group Insurance Directorate. ™ Training More than 5000 finance officers from UP and other states have already been trained on basic and advanced courses running through out the year. A state-of-art computer lab has been established at the Institute of Financial Management & Research by the State Government for this purpose. € | Future Plans ™ Integrated Pay & Accounts Office The software envisages a centralized solution for payroll preparation of all 180-200 odd departments in the district. The software will also maintain the personal details of the employees centrally. Through this application, the state government will own a very comprehensive personnel database at one place for better analysis, management and policy formulation of human resource ™ Fibre Connectivity - In a major initiative all District Treasury Offices will be connected to NIC District Centres through Fiber. This will provide a high bandwidth for data transmission between the two offices. Network in couple of districts has already been established. ™ Interactive Voice Response System IVRS based Pension Query System has been designed for the benefit of Senior Citizens of the State. This will be implemented in all District Treasuries in next couple of months. ™ Fully Automated State Finance Department A comprehensive project plan has been submitted for establishing an Intranet of all the sections, officials & establishments of the finance department within the secretariat. The computerization will cover the core activities of the department, monitor the sanctions & approvals, facilitate sharing of resources and help in analysis and planning. For further details mail to sio@up.nic.in
