---
title: "ICT at Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAH&D)"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2004"
pages: [17]
author: "Dr. M S Rao, NIC HQ"
section: "E-Gov Products & Services"
---

## ICT at Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAH&D)

The Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAH&D) is responsible for formulation of policies and programmes in the field of animal husbandry, dairy development, and fisheries. The Vision-2020 Document of the Ministry of Agriculture envisages that “the tools of ICT will provide networking of Agricultural Sector not only in the Country but also globally and the Centre and State Government Departments will have reservoir of databases” and also “bring farmers, researchers, scientists and administrators together by establishing “agriculture online” through exchange of ideas and information”. The Ninth Plan sub-committee report has recommended to build up reliable databases and network based information systems for all activities of the Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector, at district, state and national level, using NICNET facilities, to strengthen “Animal Production and Health Information System Network (APHNET)”.
The Department, in collaboration with NIC has been taking various measures to promote ICT since 1995, with the objective of making “Indian Livestock online”. The DAH&D has already established a Local Area Network (LAN) with 230 nodes at Krishi Bhawan with Internet access through NICNET gateway. An ICT Learning (e-Learning) Centre has also been established. During the period of “Bird-Flu” situation, the country update on the “Bird-Flu Situation” was regularly updated in the Department’s Website (http://www.dahd.nic.in. The National Project on Rinderpest Eradication (NPRE) Directorate has established a “Close-User-Group” Network with its agencies at State / UT levels for Project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and also connected to NICNET through RF connectivity for Internet accesses. In the overall strategy of ushering in e-Governance paradigm in the DAH&D, it has been envisaged to strengthen ICT Apparatus in (i) the DAH&D Head quarters (Krishi Bhawan), (ii) the 44 Field Offices/ Subordinate Offices and (iii) State/UT Departments of Animal Husbandry, Dairying, and Fisheries and upto district level. To carry out the same, NIC has submitted a detailed proposal to the Ministry of Agriculture. The proposal covers components such as establishment of ICT infrastructure and networking, IT empowerment of employees through training programmes, development of application software, development of Intranet Portal for the Department, creation of Portals in related areas and development of Indian Livestock Production and Health Atlas (ILiPHA) to provide a scaleable overview of spatial and temporal variation of quantitative information related to livestock production and health through the combination of maps, tables and charts. The project will be executed as a “turn-key” project through its various State Units located throughout the country.
