---
title: "ICT Initiatives in the Office of Chief Secretary, Haryana"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2014"
pages: [19, 20, 21]
author: "Vivek Verma, Ghan Shyam Bansal, Yashpal, Shakuntla Jakhu, IAS"
section: "E-Gov Products and Services"
---

## ICT Initiatives in the Office of Chief Secretary, Haryana

The Chief Secretary Office (CSO) is the Principal Executive Office of the Government of Haryana. The Chief Secretary Haryana also holds the charge of General Administration, Personnel, Training, Vigilance, and Administrative Reforms Departments. The CSO monitors and coordinates the work pertaining to all departments, boards, and corporations.
To transform delivery of government services to citizens & achieve their empowerment through easy access to information, CSO Haryana has laid emphasis on bringing about administrative reforms and computerization. NIC-Haryana was assigned the responsibility of study, design, development and implementation of an integrated framework for an effective governance. To achieve e-Administration in CSO as well as in line departments, NIC-Haryana in consultation with CSO, prepared a two prong strategy, first to develop information systems for use in its internal operations and second to disseminate the information related to public through public domain portal. The entire project endeavors for developing an integrated portal for providing various G2G and G2E services.
1. Public Domain Website of CS Haryana (http://csharyana.gov.in):
The exclusive website is developed and hosted to publish all the activities, notifications, office orders, rules, legal instructions, landmark judgments & advise which are of concern to public and other employees of the state. Authorization and secure access has been provided to the dealing officers in various branches of CS Office for uploading information / documents related to their office. Four volumes of Compendium of instructions are also published for reference on this website.
2. Centralized File Movement & Tracking Information System (http://web1.hry.nic.in/cfmshcs):
This system facilitates monitoring and timely disposal of files and comes with the facility of registration of receipts, attaching documents along with forwarding/marking, attaching documents with departmental files, dispatching final orders, dispatching letters/files and inter departmental forwarding besides automatic receipt generation. More than 10 lakh documents/files/receipts have been received and dispatched through the system, since 2009.
3. Disciplinary Cases Monitoring System: It helps in monitoring and timely disposal of disciplinary cases filed under Section 7 & 8 against employees. Reports are monitored by the Chief Secretary and other officers of the department.
4. Right to Information MIS: It is a complete work flow based system having role based facilities for registration of RTI applications, generation of Form-B, receipt of fees deposition and providing information to the applicant along with reports –pending applications, disposed, rejected applications, Form B etc.
5. Development Works Monitoring & Information System (http://web1.hry.nic.in/pmis): This system is developed for monitoring various projects/activities at district/block/village level. Deputy Commissioner Office uploads the status of the various projects in their districts up to village level. The system facilitates Departmental Heads in updating and monitoring the status of work for their respective departments.
I am happy to note that NIC is publishing the ICT initiatives implemented in the office of Chief Secretary Haryana in Informatics. Our emphasis has been on bringing about administrative reforms and computerization of major functions of CS Office, to transform relations of various arms of Government with citizens and business, better delivery of Government services to citizens, & empowerment through access to information. NIC-Haryana, as a close technology partner of the Haryana Government, facilitating the line departments on e-Governance and ICT services, was assigned the responsibility of implementing an integrated portal for G2G and G2E services for achieving e-Administration in my office as well as in line departments. NIC has developed and implemented more than 15 e-Governance applications for my office and also a comprehensive public domain web portal of CS organization. I appreciate the NIC-Haryana team, headed by Mr. Ghan Shyam Bansal, SIO for their positive contribution and proactive ICT support services. I look forward for their continued support in future as well and wish them all the best in their endeavors.
6. Result Framework Document (RFD) Performance Management System (https://rfmshry.nic.in): RFD seeks to address department’s main objectives for the year, actions proposed for achieving the laid objectives and degree of progress made in implementing these actions. RFD-MIS has been implemented in all the major departments.
7. Smart Performance Appraisal Report Recording Online Window for IAS officers (https://sparrow.eoffice.gov.in): It is a work flow based system for writing APAR for all IAS officers. Custodian (Special Secretary Personal) creates the workflow and generates the APAR and sends to all the IAS officers for self appraisal. The officer writes his/her appraisal and submits it to the Reporting Officer, which he further forwards to the Accepting Officer after writing his comments. In the end, the report comes back to the custodian for informing to the concerned officer. All these activities are conducted using Digital Signature without any need to maintain physical copy of ACR.
8. ID-Card Issuance System: It is a web based application that facilitates in issuing different types of ID cards. The system generates dynamic cards based on multiple colours and designs. Around 40,000 cards have been issued so far using the system.
9. Visitor Card Issuance System: This system helps in issuance of visitor pass for entry into Haryana Civil Secretariat premises. The system offers capturing of photographs through web cam and auto fill functionality for swift data entry process.
10. e-Granthalaya (Workflow based Library Automation System): This is a complete web enabled solution implemented at Haryana Civil Secretariat’s Library. This solution facilitates visitors to find availability of books using title, author name etc. One need not has to visit the library physically to check availability of books.
11. e-Posts/e-VaSP (Vacant and Sanctioned Posts Management System): e-Posts system helps in workflow based sanctioning of new posts up to office level and freezing of existing sanctioned strength. The system also helps in proper monitoring and execution of transfers, budget allocation, rationalization of posts, recruitments, etc.
12. Court Cases Monitoring System (CCMS Haryana): This system has been implemented in 106 departments and PSUs and facilitates maintaining details of court cases, proceedings and judgments along with linking of cases with CS Office and DC Offices. Multiple departments linked with same case can view the case history of each other. Also, using the system court cases can be transferred from one branch to other.
13. Harsamadhan: This is an integrated workflow system that primarily aims at submission of grievances by the aggrieved citizens on anywhere, anytime basis. It is running in the entire state covering all 21 districts, Chief Minister’s Office, Chief Secretary Office, Financial Commissioner’s Offices, Grievances Cell and all the departmental head offices.
14. IntraGov Haryana (http://intraharyana.nic.in): IntraGov Haryana developed & implemented as an intra government transactions portal, for G2G and G2E services for achieving e-Administration in various departments of Haryana with a single Sign On functionality. More than 12 G2G & G2E applications & services have been covered. The software development was funded by DARPG, Govt of India, as a first state specific IntraGov Portal. This portal has paved the way for development and implementation of e-Office MMP at National level.
15. Jansahayak - Workflow based MIS for Citizen Services of Haryana http://jansahayak.gov.in: This system facilitates monitoring time bound delivery of 36 citizen services at various levels.
16. IAS/HCS Civil List: (http:web1.hry.nic.in/civillist): IAS/HCS civil list with current posting details is maintained on this website. Secure facility to update the data is provided to the service branch of Secretariat.
17. e-Vigil (On-line Vigilance Cases Monitoring System): This system has been developed and implemented for State Vigilance Bureau and CS Office.
18. A high-end Video Conferencing facility has been established and operationalized in CS Committee room and EVCS in CS Office. A comprehensive LAN is operational in Haryana’s Civil & New Secretariats, integrating both secretariats and facilitating high speed Internet access.
