---
title: "In the News"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2008"
pages: [44, 45, 46, 47]
author: "Anshu Rohatgi, Prashant Belwarier, K.S.Nagesh, Sabyasachi Choudhury, Ajay Singh Chahal, Jit Raj, Moiz Hussain, PC Sahoo"
section: "News"
---

## In the News

PM's Award for Excellence in Public Administration for Lokvani, Uttar Pradesh

Smt. Zohra Chatterji, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Sh. S.B. Singh, Sr. TD and SIO, NIC U.P. State Unit, Lucknow, Sh. Amodh Kumar, Special Secretary, Department of IT & Electronics, Government of Uttar Pradesh and Sh. A.P. Singh, TD and DIO, NIC Sitapur were honoured with the 'Prime Minister's Awards for Excellence in Public Administration 2006-07 on 21st April 2008. The Awards for the year 2006-07 were given to initiatives spanning better policing through community participation, infrastructure upgradation, systems to improve quality of school education and to check drop-out rate, water management, process re-engineering by leveraging ICT, citizen empowerment and disaster management. The award comprising of a medal, scroll and cash reward, was conferred to the recipients for their significant contribution in implementation of 'Lokvani' in Uttar Pradesh and was presented them by the Hon'ble Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh during the Civil Services Day at Delhi.

Computerisation of Land Records, Jharkhand

A major milestone has been achieved in land records computerisation at East Singhbhum District with the computerisation of Khatiyan & Registration of all the nine anchals of the district. To fulfill the demands of e-governance, “Kiosks” has been established at all the anchals offices. The services offered to the citizens through kiosk are disbursal of ROR, Application acceptance for Mutation, Settlement, Bastagit Parcha, Rent deposit, Objection entries and so on. The administrative services also include day-wise money collection report for an anchal under Rent & ROR head, MIS Report for the rent collection, RoR issuance & Register-II issuance. The process of land records computerisation at the district took off with the inauguration of web-based Vasudha software by the Hon'ble CM Sh. Madhu Koda at the Jamshedpur anchal. Designed & developed by NIC, Jharkhand State Center, the Vasudha software holds great promise to the state revenue officials and administrators for land reforms and protection of legal rights of land for the citizens hence paving way for true e-governance in the state, said Sh. Shahid Ahmad, SIO, Jharkhand.

CollabCAD Workshop at NIC, Shillong

A CollabCAD Workshop was conducted recently at NIC, Shillong, by CAD division, NIC, New Delhi and NIC Meghalaya. Mr. V.S.Oberai, IAS, Principal Secretary (Infrastructure Development) Government of Meghalaya, who was also the chief guest, inaugurated the workshop. Mr. Oberai strongly appreciated the initiatives taken by NIC in lessening IT divide between Meghalaya and India. He also prised the efforts of NIC in introducing the CollabCAD Software in the North-east. Mr.Timothy Dhkar SIO, gave a welcome speech and introduced the participants to the workshop. Mr K.S.Nagesh, TD, NIC gave a key note address to the participants explaining briefly about the technical details of CollabCAD Software and the Open Source Utilities used in developing the CollabCAD Software. He also explained the benefits of the Software in CAD User departments and Small Scale & Medium Scale Industries. Mr Nagesh also emphasised on promoting the CAD Technologies in Shillong and the North-east with a technical presentation.

Management Principles Workshop at NIC Shillong

Dr VSR Krishnaiah, STD NIC HQ, New Delhi conducted a day-long workshop on Management Principles at NIC Shillong on 28th April 2008, which was attended by NIC officers from Meghalaya State Centre and other units of Shillong. The workshop dealt with areas like moving up the value chain, capability sets for the IT specialists, skills required by software managers, etc. Sh. Timothy Dkhar, SIO, NIC Meghalaya, thanked Dr Krishnaiah for taking such an initiative.

Video Conference on Election Preparedness and Randomisation SW, Himachal

Ms. Manisha Nanda, Chief Electoral Officer-cum-Secretary (Election), Himachal Pradesh, reviewed the status of election preparedness in four districts; Hamirpur, Bilaspur, Una and Kangra (Dehra Sub-division) for the of Hamirpur Parliamentary bye-elections that were held on 22nd May 2008. The CEO interacted with the Returning Officers-cum-Deputy Commissioners, Superintendents of Police and other Election officials over VC and stressed on holding the elections in a free and fair manner by adhering to the Election Commission guidelines. The SIO HP, Project Coordination-Election, DIOs and concerned NIC officers were present in the VC. The VC was arranged by NIC and was held using Multi-point Conferencing Unit set up recently over leased lines. The status of data-entry into the DISE-Election Randomisation SW was discussed. The SW has been developed by NIC and implemented in last two Elections successfully.

Minister of State, S&T and IT launches JAKEDA Website

Minister of State for Science & Technology and IT, J&K, Jenab Javaid Mustafa Mir launched the official website of J&K Energy Development Agency (JAKEDA) on 3rd April 2008 at Jammu. Also present at the occasion were Mr. Ashok K. Parmar, IAS, Secretary S&T & IT, Mr. Abhay Kumar, SIO, Mr. Rahul Sharma, Mr. V.S. Pathania from NIC and others. With the launch of this website, the people can browse through the various schemes implemented by the department, their beneficiaries, application forms and procedures. The website is hosted at http://jakeda.nic.in. and is also a bank of information like about Organisation, Achievements, Major Programmes, MNRE Incentives, what's new etc. During the function, Hon'ble Minister appreciated the efforts of NIC and also handed over the memento to the Officers of NIC J&K.

Web Meeting over NICNET via Web Connect, Maharashtra

Sh. A.K. Jain, Principal Secretary, Water Supply and Sanitation Department of Govt. of Maharashtra reviewed projects under Bharat Nirman with other CEOs of Zilla Parishads, using the Web meeting facility of NIC Maharashtra Centre. At the district side, District Informatics Officers and District Informatics Associates of NIC District Centres assisted the respective CEO to participate in the web meeting. Sh.Moiz Hussain Hussain Ali SIO Maharashtra explained the key features of web meeting to Sh. A.K. Jain and to all participants at NIC district Centres.

Workshop on Prison Management System (PMS), Jharkhand

With a view to streamline Jail administration, the Govt. of Jharkhand has decided to implement the PMS software at all the Jails including central jails of the State. A State level meeting-cum-workshop was held at Hazaribagh on 11th March 2008 to review the status of computerisation of Jails in Jharkhand. Sh. S K Barnwal, IAS & IG Prison, Sh. D K Vidyarthi & Sh. O P Gupta both AIG, Prison and all the Superintendent of Jails of Jharkhand were present in the workshop. A brief presentation on the PMS was given, followed by the demonstration of the software by Sh. Prashant Belwariar, SSA & Sh. Sachin Prabhakar, STB from NIC Jharkhand. Sh. S K Deo, District Informatics Officer, Hazaribagh provided all the necessary logistic support to make the demonstration successful. The software has been designed and developed by NIC, HQ. New Delhi and is based on client/server architecture. The software has been successfully customised and implemented at Birsa Munda Central Jail, Ranchi and the objective is to replicate the customised software at all the Jails of Jharkhand.

5 Days Training Programme under CIPA Project conducted at SKPA Udhampur (J&K)

As a part of rolling out Common Integrated Police Application (CIPA) in Jammu and Kashmir, a five-day training program from 5th-9th May 2008, by NIC J&K State Centre was recently conducted at Sher-e-Kashmir Police Academy (SKPA), Udhampur for police officials from different districts of J&K. In his inaugural address Sh. Naveen Aggarwal, IPS, Director, SKPA stressed for the implementation of the project, as it was a challenge to make police stations paperless and to make the data available online. Sh. Suresh Kumar, Scientist - 'D', who is coordinating the project in Jammu and Kashmir briefed about the importance and features of the training. The CIPA team from NIC, J&K comprising of Sh. Tarminder Singh, Scientist-'B' and Sh. Raman Gupta, Scientist-'B' along with the hand-holding persons trained the officials through lectures and hands-on session. The Director, SKPA, appreciated the training efforts made by NIC J&K.

Videoconferencing Facility Inaugurated at District Civil Court & Jail, Sareikela by Hon'ble Justice Sh. Amreshwar Sahay, Jharkhand High Court.

On 5th April'2008, Hon'ble Justice Sh. Amreshwar Sahay, Jharkhand High Court, inaugurated the videoconferencing facility between District Civil court and Jail, at Sareikel in the presence of a large number of officials, Advocates and the media persons. At the civil court Sh. V K Sahay, Hon'ble District & Session Judge and Sh. L.P.Singh SP, Sareikela, were also present on the occasion. Sh. D K Pradhan, Jail Superintendent and other officials, represented the other end, during the conference. After the inauguration, five prisoners were produced, and the new VC facility was demonstrated to the Hon'ble Justice of the High Court. Speaking over the VC system, the Hon'ble Justice discussed the benefits of the new facility with the Jail Superintendent and appreciated that the new facility will reduce the workload of the courts, helping in speedy disposal of pending cases. The VC facility between district civil court and jail is being implemented by NIC, Jharkhand on turnkey basis for the state government.

Implementation of “MukhyaMantri Awas Yojana” and Flood Control Measures through VC by Sh. Nitish Kumar, Hon'ble CM, Bihar

Hon'ble CM, Bihar Sh. Nitish Kumar has reviewed the works done towards the construction of the houses of the people, who were affected during the last years flood under a CM's housing scheme; “Mukhyamantri Awas Yojana”. In phase-II, Hon'ble CM was reviewing the flood control measures taken up in the 22 flood prone districts of the state through multi-point VC. The session was well attended by Disaster Management Minister Sh. Nitish Mishra, Chief Secretary Sh. RJM Pillai, IAS, Disaster Management's Principal Secretary, Sh. RK Singh, IAS, Sh. Chanchal Kumar, IAS, Secretary to CM and all the Districts Magistrates on 24th May 2008. VC session started with initial remarks and suggestions by Dr. B. K. Gairola, DG, NIC, New Delhi and was followed by Hon'ble CM's review of all the districts individually. He expressed satisfaction on VC services and remarked that it is helping in expedite e-governance in State. The whole programme was successfully coordinated by Sh. Santosh Kumar, STD & SIO Bihar.
