---
title: "Information Systems Today: Managing the Digital World"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2011"
pages: [48]
author: "P.K. Upadhyay"
section: "Book Review"
---

## Information Systems Today: Managing the Digital World

INFORMATION SYSTEMS TODAY: Managing the Digital World, 4th edition written by Joseph Valacich and Christoph Schneider is the best endeav-or in terms of analyzing contemporary issues regarding Managing in the Digital World; Fueling Globalization through Information Systems; Valuing Information Systems Investments; Managing the Information Systems Infrastructure; Enabling Commerce Using the Internet; Enhancing Collaboration Using Web 2.0; Securing Information Systems; Enhancing Business Intelligence Using Information Systems; Building Organizational Partnerships Using Enterprise Information Systems; Developing and Acquiring Information Systems; Managing Information Systems Ethics and Crime. There are eleven chapters in the book and deal on different issues of informa-tion systems. Initial chapters describe information system issues of real com-panies and technologies at work. These include: InfoSys: India's growing IT consult-ing firm How TiVo has changed the televi-sion industry, laying the foundation for video on demand and other entertainment services Google's meteoric rise and the challenges associated with main-taining its success. How the Nintendo Wii created tremendous demand by purposeful-ly being different than the Sony Play Station or Microsoft X-Box How the Web 2.0 phenomenon Digg is influencing news and infor-mation dissemination eBay's use of business intelligence to battle its ongoing struggles with counterfeit products and fraudulent Web sites Amazon.com's use of its sophisti-cated infrastructure to automate the supply chain for both large and small customers Chapter -"Enhancing Collaboration Using Web 2.0" examines the evolution of Internet technologies, i.e. blogging, tagging, wikis, podacasting, etc, and how they are enabling new forms of col-laboration that include virtual teams, social networking, and crowdsourcing. Net Stats in this book insights help IS practioners better understand the Internet's role in fueling globalization and transforming the digital world and provide important trends and forecasts related to Internet usage. End-of-Chapter Cases of the book present a case to encourage applying what is learned. These cases include the examples of Facebook, PayPal, LinkedIn, Crowdcourcing, The auto-mobile industry expanding their supply chains, The FBI developing a compre-hensive database of biometric informa-tion to better track and apprehend criminals, Terrorists now visiting virtu-al worlds like Second Life and World of Warcraft to test the reactions of citi-zens to different types of attacks, and many more. Coming Attractions feature of the book focuses on innovations that are likely to soon impact organizations or society. Topics include: Brain sensors to improve market research, Virtual extras in animated films and games, Very smart phones and services, High-speed 3-D fabrication, Nanowires and invisibility. The book is full of definitions where-as little instructions have been given about 'how' to setup, administer, or begin in the digital information man-agement. But the book overall spurs interests in technology compiled at sin-gle place.
