---
title: "Interview with Chairperson and Managing Director of Overseas Manpower Corporation Ltd,Tamilnadu"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2009"
pages: [24, 25]
author: "Mrs. Qudsia Gandhi, IAS"
section: "Guest Column"
---

## Interview with Chairperson and Managing Director of Overseas Manpower Corporation Ltd,Tamilnadu

Mrs. Qudsia Gandhi, IAS is Chairman & MD of Overseas Manpower Corporation Ltd, A Govt. of Tamilnadu Undertaking talks to Informatics on how her tryst with computerisation of various Sate Govt. departments is proving to be a catalyst for information dissemination.
My tryst with computerisation started as Chairperson in the Tamil Nadu Teachers' Recruitment Board (TRB). The main job of the TRB is recruiting teachers for schools as well as for colleges. The manner in which candidates were evaluated gave room to manipulation. All data was available to anyone for asking and there was no confidentiality. Therefore I decided to create a database which would be accessible only to the Chairperson and the Controller of Examinations. This needed computerisation. Therefore, in the year 1996, I hired computers along with Data Entry Operators and started the work and sent the proposal to the Government explaining the need for computerization and asked for ratification and approval. After the interview, immediately marks should be submitted to the Chairperson and the Chairperson's Office (data center) will enter the interview marks along with the other weightage marks and publish the list then and there itself. There was resentment only by the people indulging themselves in corrupt practices. Other members welcomed it. The candidates were extremely happy because they were being selected absolutely on merit basis and the results were being published as soon as the interviews were over.

As the Chairperson and Managing Director for Tamil Nadu Corporation Services-all payments to be made for Women Development (TNCWD) I through electronic mode. initiated the first paperless office in the State. We had the entire infrastructure except a few equipments which were purchased immediately. We could implement very easily and became a model for other Departments also. Not only the file movement was electronic but also generation of MIS on NGOs as well as monitoring and review of the Project Offices was being done electronically. Now this has been extended to other Project Offices also through network between the Head Office and Districts Project Offices.

My next posting was as Special Commissioner and Commissioner of Treasuries and Accounts Department. This Department had computers like 386, 486 and Pentium I was the highest configuration! The operating system was DOS and Fox Pro and UNIX were being used for accounts compilation. Luckily the T&A Dept. was declared one of the Mission Mode department for e Governance. I just grabbed this opportunity and two proposals were submitted to the Government. One was Automated Bill Passing System: the idea was that no one stands in front out the treasury counter- minimal human interaction. Second was Electronic Clearance. So pilot was planned with the help of NIC, Chennai, who prepared the software for different levels of operations and bill processing right from issuing of computerized token to auditing of bills and finally passing of the bill. Everything was system generated and instead of cheque, the payment was made through Electronic Clearing System (ECS) in the bank. Efforts were made to get online scrolls from the bank by interfacing with the banks computers. As huge vouchers were being carried to the Accountant General's Office every month, software has been prepared to generate virtual vouchers which could be accepted by the Accountant General Office. So total online solutions where bills would be received online from the Departments, processed online and paid electronically finally accounts would be rendered to the Accountant General electronically and also data to the RBI would be online.PAO Tamil Nadu Secretariat, Karur and Theni Districts were selected for the pilots.

Infrastructure: I asked for upgradation of the systems in all the 203 subtreasuries, 30 District Treasuries, 8 Pay and Accounts Offices, Pension Pay Office and the Administrative Offices of the Commissioner as well as the 3 Joint Directors. The Commissioner's Office was given new ambience with modular office and very high configuration systems. Throughout the State wherever necessary and possible buildings were repaired and modular offices provided for better connectivities. Minimal Computerisation was accelerated in other departments too to comply with the requirements of presenting bills in the appropriate format.

Change Management: The electronic processing involved process re-engineering and orientation to changes which was done in house as it was felt that the persons who are involved in their jobs as well as some of the retired stalwarts from T&A dept would be in a better position to judge which were the processes forms and registers that were redundant, out of date and were not of much use could be weeded out after making suitable amendments to the Treasury code. So very extensive brain storming sessions were conducted and ultimately 40 registers out of 117 were recommended for deletion and 13 for modification. 51 forms out of 145 recommended for deletion and 11 to be modified. 25 work procedures were scrutinized and all of them were reengineered (modified).

Training: The 3rd most important factor was training. Massive training programme was chalked out and with the help of Director of Technical Education polytechnics and engineering colleges were identified throughout the State and all the Treasury Personnel were given two weeks training for which syllabus etc. was prepared by NIC, Chennai. The resources infrastructure and personnel etc. of the these institutions were used and within the period of 6 months basic as well as advance training to all the personnel were given. Once the initial fear was banished, the officers felt more comfortable and with the help of NIC they were trained in Treasury computerized accounts.

Now all the Treasuries are being net worked throughout Tamil Nadu through TNSWAN. Links would be established between all the District Treasuries, sub treasuries, banks, the Directorate, Finance Budget Department, Accountant General Office and the RBI. The automated bill processing system is now being extended to other districts and by the end of this financial year at-least 10 Districts would be starting the automated bill processing system. The ECS and ATBPS which were running parallel are now integrated in certain Districts. The pension payment in Chennai and certain other Districts is also through ECS. Mustering of pensioners is being done through video conferencing whenever demanded by pensioners who are residing in other States or who are abroad. In Madurai District, the mustering is being done through computers. Particulars along with the photographs of pensioners have been digitised. When a pensioner appears for mustering his/her pension pay office number is keyed and the whole data along with the photo appears on the screen. Website has also been created for giving latest information regarding Treasuries Department which has received the appreciation of Government of India.

The Treasury Department is the nodal department for employees Health Insurance Scheme which has also been totally computerised and has been launched by the Hon'ble Chief Minister. Like wise, The Head Office is also having paper less Office the software for which was developed in house by the Treasuries Department. Similarly the data of the All India Service (AIS) Family benefit scheme which is being administered by Treasury Department is available online.

Department reviews and monitoring of the Treasury e-gov is being conducted through Video Conferencing in which CGM and other high level officials of RBI participate at the Head Office and in the Districts bank Officials and treasury staff and some times District Officials of other departments also participate. Besides this pensioners' grievance and interaction with the pensioners is also done through Video Conferencing by the Director of Treasuries.

Now I have taken over as Chairperson and Managing Director of Overseas Manpower Corporation Ltd., which registers aspirants of all categories- unskilled, semiskilled, skilled and professionals. Right now we have 11000 people registered but the whole data collection is manual. I have planned to receive applications online too. Discussions are on with Tamil Nadu Electronics Corporation Ltd to digitise the Registry and also for giving appropriate solution package to the OMCL for working in a more transparent and efficient manner. Currently the interviews are being done through Video Conference facilities available in the Corporate Office.
