---
title: "International e-Gov Update"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2010"
pages: [38, 39]
author: "Informatics Team"
section: "News"
---

## International e-Gov Update

UK: Government launches one-stop shop for data. A major new website launched to the public gives anyone who wants to use it free access to UK government data in one place. The site contains more than 2 500 sets of data from across the UK government. All of the data is non-personal and in a format that can be reused by any individual or business to create innovative new software tools, such as applications about house prices, local amenities and services, or access to local hospitals. So that people can continue to create new products in the future, data.gov.uk will be using a new, open licence, which allows government-owned data to be freely reused by anybody. In fact, freeing up public data will create major new opportunities for businesses. By allowing industry to use data creatively they can develop new services and generate economic value from it. Making public data available for re-use is about increasing accountability and transparency and letting people create new, innovative ways of using it. Government data should be a public resource. By releasing it, we can unlock new ideas for delivering public services, help communities and society work better, and let talented entrepreneurs and engineers create new businesses and services. This is a tremendous opportunity for UK firms to secure better value for money in service delivery and to develop innovative services which will help to grow the economy. One Stop Shop For Care Information For Older People In Scotland. Up and down Scotland there are fantastic care services for older people - helping older people to remain independent in their own homes where possible and providing quality residential care where necessary. To make all this process easier, a new information service launched in Scotland. Care Information Scotland (CIS) offers a single point of information - through one phone number and web address - on the care available for older people throughout the country. It offers detailed information for older people and their families on the range of community care services available from local authorities, the private and voluntary sector. Care Information Scotland (CIS) will change all that, providing clear information that is thorough and easy to understand. It will make life much easier for anyone seeking information - in what can often be a crisis situation for a family - on care and support for themselves or for older relatives. The new service communicates clearly eligibility for care, access to care, costs and the choices people have allowing them to make informed decisions. A one-stop-shop for online public procurement in Macedonia. Representatives of the 'e-Gov Project' and the Public Procurement Bureau of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia announced the launch of a new system that integrates the eProcurement system (EPPS) with a software solution for publishing contract notices and notifications. Developed by the Public Procurement Bureau, the integrated software creates a one-stop-shop for public procurement in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, improving the efficiency and transparency of the public procurement system in the country. The eProcurement system is a significant tool in the fight against corruption and bureaucracy, contributing to a transparent public procurement system. The system extracts the human and subjective factor in all stages of procurement through the use of modern technologies, thus reducing bureaucracy and increasing the Government's efficiency. Virtual Procedure Office, Catalonia, Spain. For the first time in the Spanish Autonomous Community of Catalonia, over 1 000 eGovernment services for both citizens and companies can be found on a single website; the Virtual Procedures Office (VPO). Among all eGovernment services through the virtual office, 160 can be entirely carried out online. Virtual procedure office is more accessible, efficient, transparent, personalized, and above all focuses on interconnected administration of Catalonia. Online services available include applications for large family certificates, reductions in the water tax or certificates of habitability, as well as enrolment for certain education exams in order to obtain the corresponding degree. As far as businesses are concerned, entrepreneurs can perform, among other operations, the preliminary notification of construction works, the notification of work related accidents and subscriptions to the new public administration project tenders. In fact, Virtual Procedure Office is the product of the aim to simplify and make administrative procedures more agile, in order to make Catalan companies more competitive, qualitative, and competitive.
