---
title: "International e-Gov Update Social Media enhancing G2C Service"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2009"
pages: [38, 39]
author: "Informatics Team"
section: "News"
---

## International e-Gov Update Social Media enhancing G2C Service

ICT has long been recognized as a key enabler of enhancing the relationship between the Government & Citizens. Direct Delivery of Services to Citizens in the place of their choice, time of their convenience, participation of Citizens in Governance are some of the concepts being leveraged by democracies across the world to build better understanding of their citizens thus developing much more enhanced relationship with the citizens. One Stop Portals, Service Gateways are all efforts in the same direction. Efficiency, Effectiveness, Transparency are other aspects of Governance being improved and enhanced by use of ICTs.
Since last couple of years a new set of technologies such as Text Messaging, Second Life, YouTube, Facebook, Wikipedia, Tagging etc., are making in roads not only in our professional lives but our personal lives as well. Knowledge sharing, socializing or keeping in touch with friends, colleagues & family, new technologies of Web 2.0, more commonly known as Social Networking are making it all possible, encompassing all age groups right from school going kids to youngsters to professionals, home makers and even senior citizens.
Web 2.0 technologies offer a huge opportunity for governments to build relationship with its citizen, bringing paradigm shift in the process of governance. In this issue, International e-Gov Updates brings to light the countries that are at the forefront in using web 2.0 technologies to strengthen Government to Citizen (G2C) interactions.
e-Petitions: United Kingdom
The Prime Minister of United Kingdom has had been receiving Petitions by post or delivered to the Number 10 door in person. Government of United Kingdom as a good move to make citizens keep in touch with the Prime Minister to share their thoughts, grievances, expectations etc., has introduced online e-Petitions.
An e-petition, a form of petition posted on a website either by individuals or groups allowing visitors to add their details in it to "sign" it. Citizens can now both create and sign petitions directly on the official site of the Prime Minister of United Kingdom at http://petitions.number10.gov.uk/. In fact, this podium gives the Prime Minister the opportunity to reach a potentially wider audience.
The system is more citizens centric where they can view the petitions either by deadline, size or start date. Citizens are free to send petitions related to Business, Education, Employment, Environment, Government, politics and public administration, Health, and many more.
Have Your Say: Australia
The Australian Government is increasingly using the internet to provide a channel for Public Consultations on variety of issues concerning the nation, Prime Minister's Blog as an immediate way for government to inform and engage with the public and create communities of interest, and also Bright Ideas e.g. Australian Youth Forum inviting citizens to provide new ideas and perspectives on a specific subject or on any subject to assist government in developing policies and programs.
In this connection, Have Your Say http://www.australia.gov.au/have-your-say section of the Australian government website has been instrumental for the government in engaging directly and widely with the public in the development of citizen-centered policy and programs. Thus, this platform proved to be a success in bridging the gap between citizens and the government resulting into an all round development of the nation.
Stay Connected:White House
The website, www.whitehouse.gov is all about the White House and the Presidents of America. It aims at bringing government closer to the Americans. The site is designed for optimization of results rendering an in-depth analysis of Obama Administration's and Government's commitment to the citizens of America. It is an effort to expand public access to on-line government information and services, and give the American people the "Information Age" government they deserve. White House allows Americans to participate in the reforms of the government directly through Blogs and a slew of social networking sites. These social networking platforms including blogs are a stepping stone between the citizens and the White House. The interactions between the President and the people can be made through comments and messages received and transferred through these sources. The site gives Americans quicker and easier access to the wide range of on-line information related to the White House and the Presidents of America.
Promotion Portal: Argentina
The Government of Argentina in a move to make administration more citizens oriented, allows a host of social networking platforms for the citizens to share their thoughts, grievances, expectations, and others in the official websites. These social networking sites in return let citizens keep in touch with the government as well as fellow citizens through the exchange of quick, frequent answers to one simple question at http://www.en.argentina.ar.
The Argentina Government aggregates a gamut of links to government agency websites where citizens could input on a variety of subjects i.e. Education, Science, Culture, and others. Publication, Information, Advertisements, Notifications are floated through social platforms to make citizens aware of all the activities performed by the government. These platforms are expanding the government's outreach capabilities and ability to interact with citizens formally. Citizens in return are actively participating in the government's move to build Argentina a great nation.
