---
title: "IntraNIC : A G2E Model for the Employees of NIC"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2005"
pages: [16]
author: "M Moni, NIC HQ"
section: null
---

## IntraNIC : A G2E Model for the Employees of NIC

An "eGOV Infrastructure with Integrated services, Global solution and Best practices" has generated interests among eGovernance Practitioners. IntraNIC, the intranet solution from National Informatics Centre (NIC) is becoming an appropriate intranet solution and one of the best practices in G2E eGovernance paradigm.
The Challenge
The NIC headquarters in New Delhi, works closely with the Central Governing agencies, while the 600+ locations are, each an integral part of this IT organization, implementing and supporting State Government projects and initiatives with localized presence. Since NIC works at the grassroots level, its expertise in software engineering extends into offering consultancy services, and the implementation of turnkey solutions, in various sectors of the economy.
Being widespread, employee-access to critical or routine notifications, policy decisions and government directives proved to be a severe challenge. Often, information of utmost significance to employees was circulated through emails only to heads of departments. This inevitably, resulted in lapses of communication and additionally, even when earnestly attempted, non-uniformity in the dissemination of information. Senior officers forwarded information based upon subjective decision making regardless of the type of information.
The Solution
The IntraNIC corporate portal is a custom development by the e-Governance Division of NIC to harness content from across the organization and to provide a common information platform for all 3,500 staff members. Since its launch in October 2002, this intranet solution has been received with great staff enthusiasm, with close to 2,500 hits per day. Significantly, these virtual staff visits are mostly from the most remote and far-flung areas in the northeast and locations in the extreme south of the country. IntraNIC is a real success story for NIC that has made employees across the corporate hierarchy very satisfied. Although, the primary driving force for the development of this solution was the need to circulate notifications, office orders, circulars and announcements effectively, this portal has now become the face of the Organization. All ICT related news and information, press releases, technology initiatives and product announcements are posted online. IntraNIC aggregates and organizes information from disparate external sources, such as the Central and State Governments, multiple news agencies and internal sources, such as NIC's Human Resources, Administration, Finance and IT support groups. It has powerful document management capabilities and its indexing functionality allows users to search for information throughout the organization, providing quick and simple access to information.
Features of IntraNIC
• A key feature of IntraNIC is that the concerned user maintains his/her respective folders. This is achieved by creating dedicated folders for administrative sections like cash & account, personnel, stores etc. These sections are assigned with the author permission to upload/delete various circular/order/documents etc. at their end.
• Issuing individual alerts (from cash & accounts, personnel & vigilance, etc) to respective users as opposed to mass mailing.
• IntraNIC provides a convenient and user friendly channel for NIC officials to access information related to every aspect of their working and knowledge sharing right at their desk by presenting a single gateway to all information and services. Further, as soon as a new office order/circular or such similar information is uploaded by the concerned department/section/person, it is immediately made available in the Notice Board area of IntraNIC website.
Bridging Islands of Knowledge Workers
Even the most remotely placed, individual worker is no longer isolated from the operational centre, development teams and projects personnel in other units of NIC across the region or the country. He/she is now, with the touch of a button, instantly connected with people and relevant reserves of information and updates, as if he/she is present at the NIC corporate headquarters, New Delhi. He/she has become well networked, more productive, accountable and responsive to changes in technology and corporate vision. This has also increased the number of content contributors and sharing of knowledge to a large extent. Recently IntraNIC was demonstrated at the seminar- "Voice of Customer" in November 2004 in New Delhi and also a presentation was made to Secretary DIT on December 15, 2004. It was well received and highly appreciated.
