---
title: "ISHiCo - Integrating ICT and Judiciary"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2007"
pages: [23, 24]
author: "Sunil Kumar"
section: "E-Gov. Products & Services"
---

## ISHiCo - Integrating ICT and Judiciary

Punjab & Haryana High Court at Chandigarh started functioning from its present building with effect from January 17, 1955. However, it was formally declared open by the first Prime Minister of India, Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru, on March 19, 1955. The plan of the building of the High Court was designed by the world famous French Architect, 'Le Corbusier' under the exuberant guidance of Hon'ble the then Chief Justice, Mr. Justice A.N. Bhandari. With such a historic background, another history was created in Punjab & Haryana High Court on 04.06.2007, when Summer Vacations of Punjab & Haryana High Court started and Hon'ble Computer Committee of Punjab & Haryana High Court decided to implement Integrated Software for High Court (ISHiCo), developed by NIC-Haryana team, in Registry Branch. It was a moment when 13 years old List of Business Information System (LOBIS), developed on UnixWare and FoxBASE+ environment was replaced with Integrated Software for High Court (ISHiCo), developed on Linux, Oracle 10g, Apache and PHP Environment. There was lots of resistance among users but they were enthusiastic for use of new technology as well. About 100 users were trained on Windows and Internet especially use of mouse operations prior to implementation of ISHiCo. The users were expecting many new features, which were not possible in old system like ease of use, availability of information on press of a button etc. NIC-Development & Implementation Team has to work hard on Data Migration 2 months prior to 04.06.2007 when data of about 17 lakhs cases was migrated from non-validated FoxBASE+ to validated Oracle 10g based tables. ISHiCo functionality has been divided into three parts viz. Registry, Courts and Branches. Registry functions include filing, scrutiny, allocation, case grouping and publication of cause list on Internet, Court functions include Adjournment of cases, Change of Status of the cases and Judgment Writing and uploading on Internet, Branches functions include cases classification, preparation of Peshi for the courts, recording and tracking of case files, issue of certified copies. Registry functions of ISHiCo covers Filing of Cases (Filing, Re-filing, Filing Modifications, Filing Type Conversion, Cases de-registration, Caveat Filing, Change of status for Caveat, Filing Query), Scrutiny of Cases (Registration of Case, Putting Objection in the cases, Generation of Reports like List of Registered Cases, Objection Cases, Pending Cases etc.), Detailed Entry (Addition of FIR Details, Lower Court Details, Land Acquisition Details, Impugned Order Details, Putting Category of case and Next Date of Hearing, Adding of Extra Advocates, Extra Parties, Maintenance of Notes & Pronouncements for Cause List etc), Case Similarities ( In order to group the similar cases, matching can be done on FIR, Land Acquisition Details, Lower Court Details, Impugned Order Details), Cause List (Allocation of Cases, Generation of Cause List includes List with or without Application Details, Draft List, Bench wise list, De-allocation of complete cause list or a particular case and related reports), Queries (by Case Number, By Diary Number, Case Distribution, By Petition, Respondent and Advocate Names), Statistical Reports (Bench wise cases allocated, State wise number of cases, Category wise cases, Case Type wise etc). Cause List, generated from ISHiCo is being uploaded on http://highcourt.chd.nic.in Website on daily basis. Court functions of ISHiCo covers Proceedings (Adjournment by Cause List or Adjournment by particular case number), Judgment Writing (automatic generation of Star Office file containing details like Case Number, Date of Decision, Party Names and Coram, uploading of PDF files on to local server, Printing of multiple PDF files in one go, Transfer of judgments to State Centre for its availability on Internet, Blocking and Unblocking of Judgments for availability)
Excerpt of the letter from Mr Justice Hemant Gupta, Hon'ble Judge and Chairman Hon'ble Computer Committee, Punjab & Haryana High Court, Chandigarh
“With the implementation of ISHiCo in Punjab & Haryana High Court, we have been able to get case related information at the click of mouse. Advocates, Litigants, Judges and Officers of High Court getting information without any delays. With this, we are looking forward toward NIC-Haryana for development of Integrated System with High Court for work efficiency and outside for better justice information delivery to Advocates & Litigants using Web Technology.”
Branches functions of ISHiCo cover File Tracking System (Inclusion of New File, Sending and Receiving Case Files, Searching a Case File), Reports and Statistics (Branch specific Cause List generation, Status wise Institution, Case Listing and Disposal counts) and Issue of Certified Copies (Request, Tracing, Printing and Delivery). Apart from this, User Administration, Master Maintenance and Comprehensive Query modules have been implemented. Comprehensive Query System has been implemented at Information Facilitation Centre at High Court, Bar Library, Advocate General Offices of Haryana and Punjab. By implementation of this module, public has been facilitated by getting status in online manner within Punjab & Haryana High Court Premises.
Inauguration of Information Facilitation Center
In order to provide better services to advocates and litigants, Case Status through SMS and Touch Screens are being planned in near future. Punjab & Haryana High Court has provided three high-end Servers and 500+ Client Machines and established 1000 Nodes Local Area Network (LAN) in order to implement ISHiCo and other Administrative Applications. NIC has provided 2 MBPS leased line for providing Internet Connectivity to Hon'ble Judges and Officers. NIC has also provided Anti-Virus Solution. NIC officers have been providing all kinds of technical support to High Court. NIC-Haryana has also developed and implemented Software for Sub-ordinate Courts Judicial Information System (SOCJIS) at Ambala, Panchkula in Haryana and Patiala in Punjab. A function to mark the launching of the first phase of e-courts project in the States of Punjab and Haryana was held on 9 July 2007 at Haryana Niwas, Sector 3, Chandigarh. Hon'ble Mr. Justice Vijender Jain, the Chief Justice presided over the function. Hon'ble Judges of the High Court; District and Sessions Judges from Punjab, Haryana and U.T. Chandigarh; Judicial Officers from Chandigarh, Panchkula and Mohali and the trainee Judicial Officers of Chandigarh Judicial Academy attended the function. Hon'ble the Chief Justice presented laptops to five Judicial Officers from the States of Punjab and Haryana as a symbolic gesture. In all IT related activities at Punjab & Haryana High Court, a well-coordinated team efforts of NIC & Punjab & Haryana High Court officers resulted in successful implementation of Projects including ISHiCo.
