---
title: "Jagatsinghpur: Marching Ahead in e-Governance"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2015"
pages: [29, 30, 31]
author: "Bibhuti Bhusan Rout, Bikash Ranjan Naik"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## Jagatsinghpur: Marching Ahead in e-Governance

Enriched with glorious cultural heritage, Jagatsinghpur district was formed after bifurcation of erstwhile Cuttack district and is surrounded by Bay of Bengal in the east, Cuttack in the west, Kendrapada in the north and Puri district in the south. Paradip Port is the pride of Jagatsinghpur as well as the state of Odisha which is one of the major ports of India. With a geographical area of 1759 sq km, it is the smallest district in Odisha.
NIC-District Centre came into existence in1996 and played a pivotal role in spearheading ICT initiatives in District Administration. Equipped with state-of-the-art infrastructure with a dedicated 100 mbps leased line along with SCPC, DAMA, VSAT & nationwide Video Conferencing facility, the centre is the hub for total IT solution, consultancy and implementation of various e-governance projects & applications.
It is my immense pleasure to learn that the quarterly News letter of NIC “INFORMATICS” is likely to publish the ICT activities and e-Governance initiatives being taken by the District Administration at Jagatsinghpur through active involvement of NIC.
The keenness and proactive support from NIC officials to roll out various e-governance projects, sharing of government information through district website, dissemination through Touch Screen based Information Kiosk, Helpdesk cum Public Facilitation Centre, Land Record Computerization, active support during General Elections, PRI Elections and disaster management has been quite commendable.
I congratulate the entire team of NIC, Jagatsinghpur under the able leadership of Shri Bibhuti Bhusan Rout, District Informatics Officer who have been working tirelessly and relentlessly providing sustainable support and services to District Administration & I hope to carry forward e-Governance to reach at the unreached in the district.
Major ICT Initiatives
yyDistrict Website: The district website (http://jagatsinghpur.nic.in) has been designed, developed by NIC to host government information in the public domain. The website flourishes important information regarding the district and various services provided by the district administration.
yyVehicle Billing System: This is a G2G intranet application implemented for government departments for hiring/requisition of private vehicles for government duties and their subsequent relieving and bill payment. The application generates bill as per the government prescribed format for each hired vehicle based upon prescribed hired rate per day for each vehicle, Kms. traveled per litre etc. It is proposed to provide SMS alerts to vehicle owners regarding bill payment. The application uses .Net technology as front-end and MS SQL SERVER 2005 as backend.
yyDisaster Management: NIC District Centre has been providing required ICT support at the time of occurrence of a natural disaster. Online Reporting of daily rainfall from blocks, development of WEBGIS, updating IDRN website (http://idrn.gov.in), Daily Situation Reporting & MIS support for assessment of damage and District Disaster Management Plan are some of the focus areas.
yyGeneral & PRI Elections: NIC District Centre has been providing total ICT solution towards management of election process during General Elections to Lok Sabha, Orissa Legislative Assembly and 3-Tier PRI elections as per the guidelines from ECI and State Election Commission. The main activities include IT enabled randomization of Polling Personnel, EVMs, formation of polling parties, generation of Appointment Orders, TA/DA aquittance, data processing for voter turnout & polled votes and finally result transmission.
yyComputerization of Land Records (CLR): The Bhulekh application has been implemented in all the Tehsils of the district and RORs for 1320 Revenue Villages have been digitized. Subsequent to mutation, the ROR database are being updated by user department from time to time and uploaded on Bhulekh web server at regular intervals for public access.
yyWEBGIS: With the available data from district administration, NIC District Centre has developed dynamic GIS for Jagatsinghpur with support from the GIS team at NIC State Centre.
yyDocument Management System (DMS): Digitization of old revenue case records at all Tehsils and district office are in progress and as soon as the digitization is completed the DMS will be implemented to capture and manage the case records in digital format.
yyTeachers Transfer Portal: An online web based transfer system for Elementary School Teachers’ has been implemented. The system provides easy access to the Elementary School Teachers for application, verification, consolidation and monitoring of their transfer requests.
yyOnline Filing of Entrepreneurship Memorandum (EM-I & EM-II): This is a single window system for entrepreneurs, implemented successfully for District Industry Centre under Department of Micro, Small, Medium Enterprise (MSME),Odisha ( http://msmeodisha.gov.in/).
yyImmigration Control System (ICS): ICS is an INTRANET application, which prescribes for checking the LOC/LOP database for particular person (foreigners /Indians) & clearance for his/her entry/exit while departing as well as arriving in India. After checking, the details of the person are filled up in a separate module called DE Card Entry and is maintained for future reference. This project is implemented only at Jagatsinghpur district among the other 43 border area Immigration Checkposts (ICPs) across the country.
yyIVFRT: IVFRT is an important MMP under NeGP. It’s various modules like c-FRO, c-Form and s-Form are already operational in the district. DIB from SP Office is the implementing agency for the project.
yyReAL Craft: It is a work flow based online application system for registration of fishing vessels operating along the Indian coast for better coastal security. It is a national project implemented in all the coastal states and UTs. Fishing vessel owners, Coast Guard, Navy, Marine Police, Fisheries Department, Insurance Agencies, State and Union Ministries are the major stakeholders of the project.
yyNADRS: NADRS has been made operational at all nodes of Animal Husbandry Department in the district. The project has been implemented and outbreak of animal disease if any, is reported by the block level Veterinary Officers.
yye-Courts: e-Courts has been implemented in the district to strengthen day-to-day functioning of Judicial Courts. Three Judiciary Court Complexes have been included viz District & Sessions Judge, SDJM & Sub-Judge Court at Kujang. Necessary ICT infrastructure has been established.
yyRecruitment & Training: Necessary IT support is provided to the District Administration for recruitment processes from time to time by managing applicant database and generating Admit Card, Merit list and conducting Computer Skill Test. Also several Computer Awareness cum Capacity Building Training Programs are undertaken to facilitate effective implementation of ICT projects & e-Governance applications.
yye-Governance Applications: Other e-Governance applications rolled out in the district include- e-Abhiyog for Online Public Grievances Redress & Monitoring System, Paddy Procurement System, e-District, e-Scholarship & MOMAS for Automation of Scholarship Disbursement System for post- matric students from SC/ST/OBC & Minority communities, E-MPR (G2G services for monitoring LA cases at different stages), e-Procurement for Online Tendering System, E-Mamata (a system for tracking mother & child for drop out & left out of regular maternal & child health services), Track Child to facilitate the matching of ‘missing’ children being reported at Police stations with those ‘found’ children who are now within the Child Protection System under ICPS/ Juvenile Justice) etc.
yyOther National level e-Governance Projects like HORTNET, AGMARKNET, CONFONET (District Consumer Forum) were successfully rolled out in the district.
yyInformation Kiosk: A touch screen based Information Kiosk has been set up at District Office to provide online access to various government services, schemes & other useful websites.
