---
title: "JHARSUGUDA: Revolutionizing Governance through ICT"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2014"
pages: [35, 36, 37]
author: "Prashant Belwariar, Akshya Mishra, Guha Poonam Tapas Kumar, IAS"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## JHARSUGUDA: Revolutionizing Governance through ICT

Jharsuguda - one of the most industrially developed districts in the state of Odisha, is situated at a distance of 372 km from the state capital Bhubaneswar. It was created on 1st April, 1994 bifurcating Sambalpur district. It covers an area of 2, 081 sq. km. and lies between 21.82 degree north longitude and 84.1 degree east latitude. The district is rich in minerals like coals, quartzite and fire clay besides deposits of limestone, granite, white sand stone and laterite stone that add to its economy.
With exponential increase in the demand for public services, ICT applications have come to be the natural choice for the District Administration in delivering these services. With 5 Blocks and Tehsils, 78 GPs and 352 villages, Jharsuguda has been able to maintain its significance in delivery of citizen-centric services because of efficient & transparent administration caused by high e-Governance penetration. Some of the major projects implemented by NIC Jharsuguda are:
Information & Communications Technologies (ICTs) have revolutionized the governance process and transformed relationship with citizens. Efforts made by NIC Jharsuguda in adopting use of ICT in the District Administration & spreading ICT culture are praiseworthy. I appreciate Shri Akshya Mishra, DIO, NIC Jharsuguda for his contributions and pro-active support to the District Administration in making e-Governance a true success specially by designing and implementing Online Grievance Monitoring System and SMS Based Poll Monitoring System during simultaneous General Elections and Assembly Elections, 2014 in the district.
NIC District Unit, Jharsuguda has played an important role in implementing various ICT based applications in different government offices of the district which have proved as a catalyst in ensuring ICT enabled growth of the district.
1. STANDARDIZED DISTRICT PORTAL (http://jharsuguda.nic.in)
The district web portal is based on the content architecture of the National Portal of India. The citizen-centric portal disseminates information related to District and Sub-district levels. It acts as a single window platform for all categories of information for G2C, G2B, G2E and G2G services.
2. OFFICIAL WEBSITE OF JHARSUGUDA POLICE (http://jharsuguda.nic.in/police)
The website of Jharsuguda Police enables citizens to send their queries/complaints directly to the District Police and know the reply to their query/complaint online. The website also offers information on Passport Verification Status, Missing Person Status, Unidentified Dead Bodies, Crime Statistics, Mahila and Sishu Desk, Registration Requirements and related acts for Foreigners, various Acts and Rules related to the Police Department etc.
3. SMS BASED POLL DAY MONITORING SYSTEM
NIC, Jharsuguda, under the guidance of District Election Officer & Collector, successfully designed and implemented SMS based “Poll Day Monitoring System” - an android based application effectively used during recently held Assembly & Parliament Elections. The earlier system of collecting information through phone took hours to compile. On the other hand, the new system takes minutes to collect information by compiling SMS received from sector officers, compiled and pushed into the Android App. The District Election Officer and other officials could see the live reports on their smart phones. The application collects a set of fixed events like - Mock Poll, Poll Start, Hourly Polling figures, Remaining voters at 3PM, Voters in queue at 5 PM, Final Voter turnout, Disturbance at any polling booth and safe return at Collection Centre through SMS using registered mobile numbers.
Based on the data received, the SMS server generates various monitoring reports, which were then pushed to the Android App for the ready reference of District Election Officer and other officers on their smart phones. The new application facilitates feeding live data into the ECI website. It also enables media persons to view different reports like Mock Poll Status, Hourly Poll figures, 5 PM Remaining voters in queue, 6 PM status, Disturbance Alerts, Final Closure of the Poll etc.
4. NETWORK SERVICES
NIC District Centre, Jharsuguda is connected with 100 Mbps OFC (Optical Fiber Cable) for Internet, Email, and Video Conferencing. A 35 node Local Area Network (LAN) has been established in the Collectorate connecting all the sections and DRDA. Leased line Network has also been extended to Head Post Office, Jharsuguda, RTO Jharsuguda and District and SDJM Courts on 24x7 basis.
5. OTHER MAJOR PROJECTS
Land Records Computerization Project (Bhulekh): This application has been implemented in all the five Tehsils of the district, with the objective to maintain and update the Land Records data and make available RORs (Pattas) to land owners and other users. The certificates (Caste, Residence/Nativity etc) are automatically generated by the software and are made available to the applicants within time.
Document Management System (DMS): With the objective to store, preserve, manage, search & utilize the old case record documents of Tehsils, DMS project has been initiated. The project facilitates conversion of physical case records into digital format for easy storage & retrieval. This project has been successfully implemented in all the Tehsils of the district.
AGMARKNET: One of the major objectives of e-Governance is to accomplish economic empowerment of farmers which has been achieved through implementation of AGMARKNET - network that links important mandis in the country to provide information on major commodities. Farmers have the access to information on best farming practices and current market prices of their produce in national and international markets. The strength of this application is to eliminate the middleman and enable farmers in getting a better deal, where customers can directly buy the commodity from the farmers with involvement from private warehouses, certifying agencies etc. The project has been implemented at the local RMC Office.
NADRS: NIC took the lead in training all VAS of Jharsuguda district from time to time on using this system. The ICT infrastructure and established computerized network through VPN connectivity for National Animal Disease Reporting System links each block, district and State Headquarters.
PRERANA: In order to expedite the efficient disposal of scholarship applications and to ensure timely payment of scholarships to the students, Post-metric Scholarship Registration Release and Network Automation - PRERANA has been initiated. The system deposits the scholarship amount directly into the bank accounts of the students.
Grievance Monitoring System: A web based system has been developed and hosted at NIC Delhi server which can be accessed at http://jharsuguda.nic.in/grievance. Separate user-ids and passwords were created for Collector, ADM, DRDA and other district level officers for viewing the status like total no. of grievances received, disposed and pending-officer-wise. Collector has the permission to view the status of all the grievances while other officers can only view the status of grievances forwarded to them.
Recruitment & Training: Recruitment software was developed which supports District Administration in carrying out various recruitment activities related to the post of Jr. Clerk, R.I, A.R.I, Jr. Stenographer etc. This is accomplished by managing the applicants’ database, generating post-wise Accepted list, Rejected list, Admit Cards and Results of the examination. Time to time training is provided to the staff of District Administration and other government offices ICT in administration.
