---
title: "Jharkhand - ICT Blossoms in the Tribal Land"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2008"
pages: [13, 14, 15, 16]
author: "Shahid Ahmad, Prashant Belwariar"
section: "From the States/UT"
---

## Jharkhand - ICT Blossoms in the Tribal Land

The 28th state of the Indian Union came into existence on 15th November '2000 - the birth anniversary of the legendary Birsa Munda. Located in the Chotanagpur Plateau, the state is famous for its rich mineral resources like Uranium, Mica, Bauxite, Fireclay, Quartz, Feldspar, Coal, Iron, Copper etc. It is surrounded by Bihar to the north, Orissa to the south, West Bengal to the east, and Uttar Pradesh and Chattisgarh to the west. The state has 32 primitive tribal groups, which constitute about 28% of the population. Forest and woodlands occupy more than 29% of the state which is amongst the highest in India.

Realising the potential of ICT, the state government created a separate department of Information Technology soon after the formation of the new state. The reach of NIC at all the districts of the state along with the state center at Ranchi helped the nascent state in implementing its major e-Governance projects thus paving way for e-Governance in the state. The implementation of State Wide Area Network (JharNet) by the state government has solved the last mile connectivity problem, creating a seamless backbone for connectivity up to the block level from the state capital, facilitating video conferencing, IP telephony and Data Center based services. Coupled with IT consultancy including software design, development & implementation, NIC has augmented the efforts in providing ICT based citizen services and has emerged as a major IT solution provider to the state government.

Establishment of Data Centre

A state-of-art “Data & Network Centre “(iNOC) having terabyte of storage space and highspeed communication link, has been inaugurated at Ranchi on 6th October'2007 by Sh. Madhu Koda, Hon'ble C.M, Jharkhand in the presence of Dr. Shakeel Ahmad, Hon'ble Union Minister of State, and Sh. B K Gairola, DG NIC. Sh. R S Sharma, Principal Secretary, IT is of the view that the iNOC Centre will begin an era of e-governance in the state as envisaged in the National e-governance Program (NeGP).

ICT based Services

*   e-Nagrik Sewa: The first e-Nagrik Sewa Kendra was inaugurated at the block HQ in the Dhanbad district. NIC developed a web-based solution for providing G2C services from the Kendra. The web-enabled application is being implemented through Citizen Service Centres (CSC's) which are being gradually rolled out in the state. The web interface http://www.jhr.nic.in/csc presents a Citizen and a Government interface. The e-Nagrik Sewa facilitates submission of application forms by the citizens for issue of certificates like Caste, Birth, Death, Residential and Income. The citizen interface provides for the submission, tracking and monitoring of applications along with the facility to download forms and guidelines issued by the government from time to time. The Government interface provides for updating the status of the applications submitted and generates the Certificates using the utility link.
*   VC based Justice in Jails: ISDN based video conferencing facility has been setup between the various Central Jail / District Jails and the Civil Courts throughout the state, for producing the under trials to the courts without moving them physically. This has not only ensured justice and quick disposal of their cases but also efficiently removed security related problems associated with shifting and producing the under trials in the courts.
*   Web Hosting: NIC has been actively involved in providing information services by representing the state and its important institutions to the cyber community through the development and hosting of websites. The hosting of districts websites has highlighted the tribal areas and cultures of the state. At present all the districts websites have been hosted on NIC web server.
*   Result Publications on Web - Results of the Board Examinations conducted by Jharkhand Academic council (JAC) and PG Courses of Central Institute of Psychiatry (a central govt. organisation) are published annually on the web.

e-Governance Projects Implemented

*   Online VAT: The online VAT software, developed in Open source J2ee environment and Oracle 10g database for computerisation of commercial tax has been a major e-Governance initiative in the state. The software has not only improved tax compliance, reduced tax evasion but also brought many new commercial establishments into the tax net. The software has increased the revenue collection several folds enforcing compliance of tax rules and regulations. It has been designed and developed by NIC using modular approach, for meeting the requirements of commercial tax department pertaining to VAT. The software is functional in all 28 Circles of the state.
*   Online Treasury Information System: A web-based Treasury Information System KUBER has been implemented in the state for maintaining all treasury related transactions through secured and role-based operations from all the treasuries through JharNet. The central repository of the data generates useful MIS for the Government and the citizen. An online DDO level Bill management module has also been implemented to facilitate bill generation, DDO level data management and the digital transfer of Bill data and GPF/CPF schedules to the treasuries. Biometric authentication at the level of Treasury Officers is being introduced.
*   GPF Computerisation: The Bhavishya Nidhi software developed on Visual basic and Oracle 10g has been implemented at the GPF Directorate and all its District offices of the state. The system maintains the subscriber details, their contributions, advances, refunds etc. and generates the necessary accounts with proper checks. The software maintains the details of employees who are covered under CPS. The software generates the CPS number and prepares the CPS accounts of those employees. The GPF details of the subscribers can be viewed on the website http://jhr.nic.in/gpf .
*   Land Records Computerisation: A unicode based application software Vasudha has been developed in VB.Net and MS SqlServer for Land Record Computerisation in the State to facilitate easy maintenance and updation of land records for legal changes like transfer of ownership etc. Various analysis reports can be generated in tabular and graphical formats. The software has been implemented in the East Singhbhum district of the state, which maintains information regarding KHATIYAN and REGISTER-II. The computerisation of all the nine anchal offices of the district, have been completed and online mutation facility has also been implemented.
*   Transport Computerisation: The VAHAN and SARATHI software has been implemented in all the 18 District Transport Offices (DTO), 4 Regional Transport Authorities and State Transport Authority offices. The Registration of vehicle, Tax realisation, Issue of Permits and Vehicle fitness details are done by VAHAN software where as SARATHI is used to issue Driving License, Conductor's License and License to Driving School. Registration Certificate Book and Driving Licenses are being issued in smart card medium in 11 out of 18 District Transport Offices. The state received the Silver Icon award at the 9th national conference on e-governance under Service Delivery category for VAHAN.
*   Prison Management System: The Central Jails at Ranchi and Hazaribagh have been computerised with the implementation of the Prison Management System. The system monitors prisoner details along with their photographs and thumb impression. The Visitors management System module has also been implemented. The process of replicating the software at all the district and sub jails of the state is under way.
*   Mother & Child Care (MAMTA): The computerisation of immunization process has been done with the implementation of MAMTA software. The software individually tracks both mother and child related care during pre and post natal phase. The data of individual pregnant woman and the newly born is captured at anganwadi level. The necessary training to the officials has been given for its proper implementation.
*   Cause List Management Information System (CLMIS): The High court has been computerised by establishing a campus-wide LAN with state-of-art servers and clients. The CLIMS maintains the status of cases from the filing stage to the judgment of the cases and generates the cause lists regularly by uploading it on the website- http://www.jharkhandhighcourt.nic.in. Litigants can enquire their case status through the IVRS facility. The Payroll system is also operational for the employees of the high court.
*   City Civil Court Computerisation: Ranchi civil court has been taken up as the pilot site and a state-of-art LAN has been established covering 45 courts and offices of different buildings in the campus. The Case Management Information System has been implemented for maintaining the case details. The cause lists are generated daily. The litigants can also know their case status on the website http://www.civilcourtranchi.nic.in. The daily orders and judgments are also made available on the website.
*   Consumer Forum Computerisation (CONFONET): The computerisation and Networking of consumer forums both at the state commission and district forums have been implemented in the state. The project aims for time-bound delivery of justice to the consumers in the state. The case monitoring systems records the filing details, orders, case details and judgments etc. passed by the consumer courts. The cause list is generated on daily and weekly basis. The software has provision for incorporating the backlog cases.
*   Common Integrated Police Application (CIPA): The CIPA software has been implemented in 38 police stations of Ranchi district of the state. The software provides an efficient ways of organising crime records and for generating queries and reports. The software has greatly helped the police administration in tracking the criminals and has expedited the investigation process for various cases. Training program has been organised for the police personnel to handle the software.
*   Online passport: The Passport Control & Issuance System at Regional Passport Office, Ranchi checks the entire process online starting from receiving application, printing and dispatching of Passport. A computer generated file number is given to applicant during submission of application for future enquiry over telephone or through passport website (http://www.passport.nic.in). The computerisation involves applications details, fees, CID reports, loss case entry, report generation, passport booklet and number allotment and system administration.
*   Registration Department: The state IT department has taken up computerisation of Sub Registrar offices under Public Private Partnership (PPP) model. Web-based software has been developed which caters to the registration of all types of documents that is presented for registration. The software takes thumb impression and photographs for both the parties apart from other details of the documents. The stamp fees etc. are calculated automatically using the software. The software has been rolled out at Ranchi, East Singhbhum, Garhwa & Khunti SRO's and will cover the entire sub registrar offices of the state.
*   Municipal Corporation: The computerisation of Ranchi Municipal Corporation has been a major e-governance project executed by the state IT department. The holding details under Ranchi Municipal Corporation have been computerised. The software calculates the tax details holding-wise and issues notices for tax dues etc. The necessary MIS reports are generated through the software. The software has provision for backlog entry of holdings details and taxes paid.
*   Employment Exchange: The computerisation of Ranchi employment exchange has been done on a pilot basis by the state IT department. Software was developed which has features for registration of unemployed, issue of identity cards with identification number, extensive search facility and generation of necessary MIS. The employer requirements are matched with the database and the detail list of unemployed candidates is sent to the employer for further action.

Several other projects like Budget Preparation, Integrated Information System for Food grain management (IISFM), Patient Registration System (Ranchi Institute of Neuro-Psychiatry and Applied Sciences), Teachers Data Management System (HRD Department, GOJ), NREGA (Rural Development Department), Instant Money Order Transfer (Department of Post), SAMVAD (Public Grievance), AGMARKNET, Online Counseling for CBSE-AIEEE, 7th All India School Education Survey, DACNET has been successfully implemented within the state.

Excerpts from a letter by Sh. RS Sharma, IAS & Principal Secretary, IT, Govt. of Jharkhand

I am happy to know that “Informatics” is featuring Jharkhand State in its July 2008 issue. The “Informatics” provides a national perspective for e-governance activities and has been useful in giving recent technological advances in the field of ICT. The Department of Information Technology, Govt of Jharkhand has taken up many e-governance projects with the active support from NIC Jharkhand. The e-governance projects in the sectors like Treasury, Transport, Jails, Commercial Taxes and CSCs have been successful and NIC Jharkhand equally shares our success. The dedicated technical manpower and spread of NIC in all Districts of the State has been its greatest strength. I wish NIC Jharkhand will continue to give active support in future e-governance projects to provide better G2C services in the State.
