---
title: "JODHPUR - ICT Shines Over The Sun City"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2012"
pages: [38, 39]
author: "HANUMAN SINGH GEHLOT, RAVI MATHUR"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## JODHPUR - ICT Shines Over The Sun City

Sun city - Jodhpur in Rajasthan is also known as the Blue City, an apt name as most houses in the old city are in shades of blue belonging to the Pushkarna brahmins. Set on the eastern fringe of the Thar Desert, the royal city echoes with tales of antiquity in the emptiness of the desert. Once the capital of the Marwar state, it was the home of the 'Ran Banka Rathores'. The hustle and bustle, closed knit culture, temples and havelis, vibrant traditions, polite hospitality, spices and fabrics, colour and texture, a booming handicrafts industry, all add up to make Jodhpur a wonderful sojourn and a shopper's paradise. NIC District Center was set up in 1988, and since beginning has played a vital role in promoting ICT culture. It regularly supports the District administration, Rajasthan High Court, District Court and other Government department in better planning and decision support and has developed and implemented many e-Governance projects. Jodhpur Website: Launched by Hon'ble CM Sh. Ashok Gehlot, this comprehensive website, http://jodhpur.nic.in, which has been designed, developed and hosted by NIC and covers all aspects of information which could be of interest to a common man. KEY ICT INITIATIVES SUGAM Single Window System: This system which initially started with two services viz. domicile and caste certificate, in 2002 at Jodhpur Collectorate is now delivering 40 services. Various administrative reports and other registers are also generated. Certificates are generated on pre-printed stationery in Hindi. Minority, Solvency, Income, Permission letter for Birth/Death, Mutation, Copy of Record, Arm License Renewal, Pension, NOC, RTI & Miscellaneous Application, SC-ST, OBC, SBC Certificates are being delivered through this software. Citizens can inquire status of their application from the website. The project has now been rolled out in 289 locations - all 33 Districts HQ, 247 Tehsils HQ and 9 Sub Tehsils overall 289 locations. SUGAM Redressal Public Grievances: It is a web based system, http://sugamrpg.raj.nic.in, to provide an effective grievance redressal mechanism for the citizens and is being monitored regularly by District Administration. Land Record Computerisation (APNAKHATA): Data entry and verification of data of all Seven tehsils has been completed and tehsil level centers 'Khata Kendras', have been made operational where Nakal of Khata(ROR) are being issued to citizens. A Touch Screen kiosk has been installed at DC Office from which any citizen can take latest information of Land Record and various schemes of Government. General Elections: Support provided in successful conduct of the elections for Lok Shabha, Assembly, Nagar Palika, Panchyat Raj and Krishi Upej Mandi Samiti process by undertaking various polling activities, result transmissions and online counting software has been developed and implemented for local display. Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS): It is a web based system for complete government financial accounting. It includes budget planning, estimates preparation, distribution / allocation, fund management, treasury functions etc. It eventually improves the government services and expedites government operations making the budget process more transparent. IFMS has been initiated with the concept of 'Any-Where-Treasury' and it's a centralized web based solution. Treasury Computerisation System (TCS): Implemented at all treasuries, it covers - compilation of accounts, Civil & Old Age Pension payments, stamps inventory, Accounting of Personal Deposit and bill passing Process. It produces Schedule of Payment & Receipts, List of Payments, Cash Books, BT Register and various useful MIS reports. The daily account is prepared, reconciled and transferred to district server from Sub Treasuries. Data Depository System: It covers all the 950 DDO's of District. Salary of all the state government employees of the district is maintained centrally. Online Counseling: Since 2008, Jai Narain Vyas University conducted Online counseling for Rajasthan Pre Teacher Education Test for admission to one year B.Ed. Course in collaboration with NIC. District Network: A well structured LAN has been established in District Collectorate, having a number of servers & clients which are being used for various software applications. E-Mail & Internet connectivity has also been provided. District center is connected to State HQ through 34mbps circuit. Network connectivity extended to Rajasthan High Court, Desert Medicine Research Center and 4 Post Office through 2mbps Lease Line. National Knowledge Network (NKN): Technical support has been extended to IIT Rajasthan, CAZRI, AFRI and Regional Remote Sensing Center (ISRO) for NKN connectivity. e-Peshi: Videoconferencing system between Central Jail and District Court was installed and this facility is being used regularly for under trial prisoners. Central Jail Project: Two successfully running modules are "Prison Management System" for Prisoners information and "Visitors Management System" for visitor's information. Pension Monitoring System: Implemented at Joint Director Pension's office successfully since 1994 monitors and generates all types of pension cases. Pre-88 pension revision cases are also being monitored. Other projects implemented and running successfully are: CM Cell Public Grievances, e-Gram Monitoring System, MIS for MG-NREGS, Arms Licenses Monitoring System and Video Conferencing System. NATIONAL LEVEL PROJECTS Some of the projects running successfully are - AGRICULTURE MARKETING PRICE MONITORING has been implemented for daily Monitoring of commodity prices at 7 Krishi Upaj Mandi Samiti. This data is being uploaded at National Level Portal http://agmarknet.nic.in. - National Social Assistance Programme programme aims at ensuring minimum national standard for social assistance in addition to the benefits that states are currently providing or might provide in future. - NICNET MEDLARS SERVICES http://indmed.nic.in To disseminate information from NLM's Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System (MEDLRAS) to students and research scholars. Training: Regular training imparted to employees of different government departments to enable them to clear their basic concepts and use ICT tools efficiently has proved to be beneficial in executing many ICT activities and Projects. ACCOLADES - CSI Nihilent e-Governance Award 2008-09 - e-World Public Choice Award 2011 - SKOCH Digital Inclusion Award 2011
