---
title: "Kanpur Dehat : Serving Rural Citizens at their Doorstep"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2010"
pages: [32, 33]
author: "Alok Tiwari"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## Kanpur Dehat : Serving Rural Citizens at their Doorstep

ICT is fast spreading by virtues of its adoption in various sectors serving the citizens. NIC, Kanpur Dehat, established in 1988, has been serving the rural masses by facilitating the district administration, development departments and citizens through small and large IT based initiatives. The IT roadmap for Kanpur Dehat was prepared in the year-2008 to provide 32 online services to the different sections of the society through Jan Sewa Kendras. On 15th July, 2008 the website http://kanpurdehat.nic.in/nss was inaugurated by the then District Magistrate Sh. O.P.N.Singh, IAS. This was a major step towards information dissemination at the grass root level as the website provides the G2C & G2G services, and also extends the delivery of services to the doorstep of the citizens. The website caters to the government, general public and especially those living in remote and far flung areas of the district. It is being extensively used by the government departments, colleges, universities to check the genuineness & authenticity of the certificates issued at the tehsil level. People can view Record of Rights (RoR), pension & scholarship details, salary slips (for government employees), census and election related information, government tenders, BPL list etc. They can track the grievances filed through single window system or Lokvani and download more than 60 different types of service related application forms. e-tehsil: The 'e-tehsil' application has been developed by NIC, Kanpur Dehat, to issue different types of certificates, such as Caste, Domicile and Income, at the tehsil level. The application is fed at the tehsil computer centre and the certificates are generated on the preprinted stationary with running serial number at the tehsil before being delivered to the citizen. This saves a lot of time and prevents unnecessary running between the government offices by the citizens. Based on PPP model, the project has been able to generate substantial revenue for district administration and the authenticity of the certificates can be verified at kanpurdehat.nic.in/nss. e-tehsil has created the center of excellence for services at the tehsil level with a motto to provide 'service with a smile'. There is considerable improvement in delivery of services to the rural citizens with 24X7 availability, no bribe, hassle free and free from touts. The certificates are neat, with considerable reduction in errors and in-time delivery. Nagrik Soochna Kendra (Information Kiosk): A touch screen information kiosk has been setup at the Collectorate compound Kanpur Dehat to provide various types of information to the general public by simply navigating through the touch screen menus. The complete application is developed in local language 'Hindi' to make it more users friendly and the information profile includes – Statistical information about the District. Statistical information about the State; Information on historical & tourist places; Contact directory of district officials; Information on development schemes; RTI related information; Maps of the district, tehsil, block; Treasury & Budget Information, etc. and Health & Education related information. Land Records Computerisation (LRC) Project: LRC is one of the most successful projects, which facilitates the electronic generation of Record of Rights (RoR) and has been implemented in all the tehsils of the district. The project is distributing RoRs to rural citizens for last five years and has recently been integrated with the UP State Wide Area Network. Tehsils have started sending data via SWAN to District headquarter which is published at the site http://bhulekh.up.nic.in. RefNIC: The software has been specially designed for District Magistrate & Chief Development Officer of the District to handle problems and grievances of general public. The complete monitoring and tracking of the received applications is done through RefNIC software. Various MIS reports are generated at different levels, which results in a better Decision Support System. The software has now been introduced in District Treasury-Office, SP- Office and District Judge-Office. CourtMIS: The CourtMIS project is for better management of cases in the courts of District Magistrate, ADM, SDM and Tehsildars. It can handle different types of cases and the proceedings of the case are regularly updated after the hearing is done at the court. CauseNIC: The District Court Computer Center is a center of excellence, which has online database of civil and criminal cases. The CauseNIC software has almost automated all the activities of the District Court. The cause list for all the 38 courts are generated by CauseNIC and the proceedings of the courts are regularly fed by the Peshkars of the courts, which ensures proper maintenance of the database. The 'HOW Pension System' (Handicap, Oldage, Widow Pension): This is an integrated software for the Handicap, Oldage and Widow pensioners of the district. The data from all the three departments are fed with the help of agencies and after processing it is also made available to the general public through the website kanpurdehat.nic.in/nss. Backup, Internet Services & Training: NIC District Centre is giving backup and Internet services to all the departments of Kanpur Dehat housed in the Collectorate and Vikas Bhawan. A year long training schedule is in place to train the revenue & development officials, which helps in change management. In addition to these, NIC, Kanpur Dehat has successfully implemented the state level project of treasury computerization. It has been providing IT services to the district basic education department from last 13 years. It is one of the first few districts to establish SWAN connectivity in the tehsils and blocks and is committed to extend IT enabled Services to the citizens right at their doorstep.
