---
title: "LAHAUL & SPITI :"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2005"
pages: [11]
author: "Mukesh K Ralli, Himachal Pradesh Correspondent"
section: "STATE IN FOCUS"
---

## LAHAUL & SPITI :

NIC, Lahaul & Spiti, Keylong the highest centre of Himachal Pradesh situated at an altitude of 3350 metres (10,988 feet) was set up in the year 1988. The district remains covered with snow for a great part of the year and is cut off from the adjoining areas for about 6 months (Oct-May) every year and temperature falls to -27 degree C in winters. Though the district is a tribal area, the ICT infrastructure available is in tune with the latest technology.
Challenges
The main challenge was not only to make the officials aware of IT but also to introduce its use in various activities performed by the officials/departments. Hence, many training programmes for the officials of DC office were conducted and today, almost every official in DC office uses computers.
Major Accomplishments:
District Website: The launching of the website for this snow-bound district, which is considered as tourists' paradise, assumes a great significance. The district is cut off by road for more than 6 months in a year during winter. This site is the major source of information for the tourists. The website is the only link of communication for the residents during isolating winters. (http://hplahaulspiti.nic.in)
Internet & E-mail: A high speed Internet VSAT, installed at NIC Keylong centre is the only reliable channel of communication and helps the people of the district overcome the communication barrier with the world.
Local Area Network: A LAN at DC office complex connects the offices of Deputy Commissioner, Superintendent of Police, Sub Divisional Magistrate, Project Officer & ITDP and provides Internet & Email services. Also, a Remote Access Server (RAS) is installed for the CM office, IPH office and Election office.
E-Governance Centre: In this centre, established in SDM office, services of computerized driving licenses and registration of vehicles have been started. It is a self-sustaining project and all the expenditure is met through the income generated by the service charges.
Paybill Computerisation: The paybill computerisation has been done for the DC Office, SP Office, Animal Husbandry office and District Horticulture Office.
Welfare MIS: Welfare Department issues quarterly about 1000 Money Orders to the pensioners. This work was done manually earlier and was very time consuming. Now, through the computerized system, the whole process takes merely 3 days.
Land Record Computerisation: Base entry of 70 villages has been completed and data entry of other villages is under way. The target is to complete the base entry of Lahaul by March 2005 and make the Tehsils online.
Other Activities: Other projects taken up by NIC Lahaul & Spiti are AISES School Survey National Project, District Telephone Directory, Annual Budget of DC Office, Election Support etc.
Significant Achievements:
Computer Trainings: Without computer training of the officials, implementation of the projects is impossible and hence, time-to-time proper training is imparted. 6-day training programmes for the officials of Keylong & Udaipur were conducted with the support of NIC-HIPA at DC Office, Keylong.
Examination Results: Internet facility is only available at NIC Keylong and results are provided to the students free of cost.
Services:
• A Tourist Brochure on District Lahaul & Spiti was developed and distributed to local hotels, PCOs and Circuit House for tourists' assistance.
• Internet & Email services are provided to people for railway reservation, entrance test results, application forms etc free of cost.
Technical Support: In this remote, snow-bound place, the technical support for repair is rarely provided by the companies/vendors and therefore, NIC serves as the messiah to provide technical support to all the offices with respect to hardware & software troubleshooting.
New Initiatives:
• Establishment of VSAT/Internet at Kaza
• Comprehensive computerisation of DC Office
The Road Ahead:
• Connect all the offices of the district through Internet and establish communication through email.
• Establish Video Conferencing Unit at DC Office Keylong & ADC Office Kaza.
• Setting up of E-Governance centre at Udaipur & Kaza.
• To improve the services being offered by NIC in one of the remotest parts of the world.
District Informatics Associate Mohan Rakesh Agrawat.
