---
title: "Launch of National Animal Disease Reporting System (NADRS)"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2013"
pages: [48]
author: null
section: "In the News"
---

## Launch of National Animal Disease Reporting System (NADRS)

Shri Sharad Pawar, the Hon’ble Union Minister of Agriculture and Food Processing Industries, launched the National Animal Disease Reporting System (NADRS), at the National Conference of State Ministers of Animal Husbandry, Dairy Development and Fisheries (DADF), in the Symposium Hall, NASC, Pusa, New Delhi on February 6, 2013.
NADRS websites, http://nadrs.gov.in and http://nadrsapps.gov.in, provide computerized information of animal diseases linking each block / taluka, district and state headquarters to a Central Project Monitoring Unit (CPMU) at New Delhi.
Shri M.Moni, DDG, NIC addressing the gathering explained that NADRS is a sponsored project of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries (DADF), Ministry of Agriculture being implemented by NIC at total estimated cost of Rs 104.05 crore with the support of State/UT Departments of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services. This system covers 6,350 blocks and 615 districts of the 28 States and 7 Union Territories networking 7032 locations in the country. NADRS provides instant alerts about animal diseases outbreak, remedial measures, etc. The system also generates daily incidence disease case reporting, creation of first information report of the outbreak and follow-up. Case reporting incorporates the location details, case information, animal details like species, habitat, breed, etc., disease symptoms, gender and treatment details. It enables the Block, District and State Animal Health Officials and Livestock Farmers to report the disease through a web-based interface, SMS and e-mail. All the notifiable diseases scheduled in the ‘Prevention and Control of Infectious & Contagious Diseases in Animal Act 2009’ are included in the reporting system. NADRS will help in generating GIS mapping and analytical modeling of animal diseases and the animal health situation in the country.
Shri M.Moni stated that ICT Infrastructure has been established through M/s. Wipro Ltd. and M/s. HCL Ltd across the country. He also explained that about 8,000 veterinary/animal husbandry officials at state, district and upto block levels have been imparted training on NADRS Applications Software and Portal through M/s. Shriram Horizon, M/s. Net Creative, M/s. Indus Net and training on basics of computers has been achieved through M/s. NIIT Ltd, the empanelled vendors of NIC/NICSI, during 2011-13.
Shri Moni thanked DADF for sanctioning the NADRS project to NIC for implementation, through collaborative efforts of State / UT Departments of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services, their District and Block level offices. For decision support on disease advisories, ICAR and State Veterinary Universities have been involved. The project has been successful on account of the efforts of the Project Team at NIC Headquarters, NIC State / UT Centres and NIC District Centres across the country. To strengthen the NADRS Project, 5 Senior Research Fellows (SRFs) and 35 Junior Research Fellows ( JRFs) with Veterinary/Animal Sciences subject specialization have joined the NADRS project and are posted at Central Project Monitoring Unit (CPMU) and 35 State Project Monitoring Units (SPMUs).
