---
title: "Minerals Activities Administration System in Karnataka"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2010"
pages: [10, 11]
author: "A. Venkatesan, T. Mohan Dhas"
section: "E-Gov Products & Services"
---

## Minerals Activities Administration System in Karnataka

Department of Mines and Geology (DMG), Government of Karnataka is the nodal government department administrating the mining and mineral development activities in the state. Minerals Activities Administration System (MAAS) has two independent and tightly integrated systems: Intramine the web based, workflow and Intranet driven application software for the management and administration of mineral activities and PMS (Permit Management System) the workflow based Internet/ Intranet driven software for the issue and management of Permits for the transportation of minerals. Intramine and PMS together constitute MAAS and these two packages are integrated with web services so that master data changes like new leases / permits, renewals, surrender, royalty rates and other critical data like court cases information are reflected in the PMS as soon as they are updated using Intramine. Intramine covers all lifecycle activities from application for leases / permits (new or renewal) to issue of leases / permits and administrate and manage these leases and permits as per the government rules, procedures and systems. Permit Management System (PMS) is used for the issue of permits and monitoring the transportation at check posts. Department of Mines & Geology, Department of Revenue, Forest and Police Departments, Pollution Control and Environmental Authorities, District and Sub-district administrative departments, Central Government Departments like Ministry of Mines, Ministry of Atomic Energy, Department of Environment & Forests, Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM), Public, and lease and permit holders are the stakeholders of the project. PMS is being extended to lessees along with Payment Gateway so that lessees will be able to load applications from their places and after approval (with digitally signed permits), lessees print the digitally signed permits for transporting minerals. Both INTRAMINE and PMS have been integrated with Payment Gateway / Net Banking, SMS , Mobile Check Posts and Mobile Enforcements with mobile / laptop / palmtop based applications and GIS applications with maps integrated with the lease / permit master data. These features of the software enable anytime, anywhere, convenient and location independent services. Salient Features: Intramine is driven by workflows covering all procedures and norms of central and state acts and rules towards the administration of mineral administration and covers the following major functionalities:  Mining Leases, Quarry Leases, Reconnaissance Permits, Prospecting Leases (New / Renewal);  Patta Land, Sand Transport, Minerals Permits;  Collection of Royalties, Fees and Taxes;  Suspension, Cancellation, Surrender, Amalgamation. Appeals, Death Cases, additional minerals, and other lifecycle activities of leases and permits;  Demand Collection Balances (DCB);  Court Cases Management;  Payment Gateway with Double Verification;  SMS & GIS Maps Integration;  Integration of Finger Print Devices and e-Tokens based Digital Signature Certificates;  Mobile Application for Virtual Check Posts. Following are the major features of the software:  Multiple levels of security and Role Based Application Security (SECURE Word for Internet Users);  Finger Print Devices and Smart Card / e-Token based Digital Signature for employees;  Permits are Digitally Signed with Barcodes, random-numbers, water-marking, etc;  Payment Gateway / Net Banking Integration;  Mobile Systems / handheld systems for Check Posts & Enforcement;  Intranet Portals and dashboards for DMG Employees;  Internet Portals for Lessees and Public;  SMS enabled for instant information on approvals, payments etc.;  Convenience, choice, location-independent and transparent access to software;  Enforcement and Monitoring Modules for other Government Agencies like Forests, Revenue, District Administration etc. Key Benefits, Advantages and Success Factors: The key success factor is the availability of services and the transparent manner in which these services are provided to both DMG remote locations and public like lease holders and permit holders. This availability factor along with INTERNET technologies provides a unique opportunity for the public to leverage the technologies and derive the maximum benefit. The hard fact is that once a system is in place and once the stakeholders begin to taste the benefits it is very difficult to do away with the system. In the manual system, lease holders or their representatives had to visit the DMG office several times in a day to have the permits to transport minerals which they had produced. With PMS, lessees could file applications from office / home and print the permits and transport minerals (convenience, choice, location-independent access to software). Workload in DMG has been significantly reduced and officers are able to devote more efforts towards enforcement. Services like Payment Gateway, SMS integration and filing applications online and printing permits will definitely improve the services and both DMG and the Lease / Permit holders will benefit a lot. Thus we are extending the benefit of Internet like convenience, choice, reduction of cost, availability etc to the public. The mobile applications as well as Internet portals pave the way for Mobile Check Posts (Virtual) and Mobile Enforcements without the requirement for any immovable infrastructure like check posts with systems etc. The product can be integrated with external stakeholders like Ministry of Mines, Environment and Forests, Pollution Control Boards, Police and Revenue Department.
