---
title: "National Portal of India bags the coveted CSI-Nihilent award 2010-2011"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2012"
pages: [42]
author: "Alk Mishra, D.P Misra"
section: "National Portal Update"
---

## National Portal of India bags the coveted CSI-Nihilent award 2010-2011

Ever since its inception in 2005, National Portal of India (NPI), http://india.gov.in has been constantly endeavoring in fulfilling citizens' search on various information and services provided by the Government of India. The broad scope of this portal is to establish a single-window access to information and services being delivered by any Government of Indian constituent, enhancing interaction between government and citizen (G2C), government and business (G2B), government and employee (G2E) and government departments, and to act as an integral part of the overall mission towards 'good governance'. As of today, when NPI is celebrating its 7th year of existence on the cyber world, it is playing a pivotal role in delivering impeccable service in accessing over 7000 existing Indian Government Websites and Portals and the number is increasing constantly. Besides, it has curved a niche in helping a citizen to access the information and services from these websites in the most user friendly manner. Therefore, india.gov.in, a Mission Mode Project under National e-Governance Plan (NeGP), has emerged as a tool to provide the much needed single window access to all government information and services. Recently the website added another feather to its cap, when it received the prestigious CSI Nihilent award for 2010-2011. The portal was conferred the 'Special Recognition award of National Initiatives. In its endeavor to cater to most of the citizens' needs, the NPI plays host to over 1900 services from various states/ministries/departments which are all packaged under the 'HOW DO I' section of the portal. It is also a central repository for numerous Government Forms, Documents, Acts, Rules, Schemes and Policies. The portal receives overwhelming feedback on a daily basis through its various sections, which actively solicit suggestions, complaints and comments from users. The aesthetic appeal, thoughtful, informative and user friendly content made the Portal most favorite bookmarked site, as numerous hits poured in from all corners of the world. Furthermore; the Accessibility Statement strengthens the commitment of accessibility to all its users irrespective of device in use, technology or ability. Now in its seventh year of existence, the portal can be aptly termed as the cyber factes of the Indian Government which is complete in all aspects. In a nutshell, this bilingual Portal-English and Hindi, which endorses G2A (Government to All) interface is built and designed, keeping in mind the citizens in common.
