---
title: "National Awards to NIC at the 24th National Conference on eGovernence, Hyderabad, Telangana"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2022"
pages: [45, 46]
author: null
section: "Accolades"
---

## National Awards to NIC at the 24th National Conference on eGovernence, Hyderabad, Telangana

The conference is a platform for constructive exchange of ideas on latest technologies for promoting eGovernance.
1 Shri D.C. Misra, DDG, NIC, moderated the breakout session on ‘Seamless end-to-end Service Delivery without human interference through technological interventions’ at the 24th National Conference on eGovernance organised by DARPG, MeitY & Telangana State Government at Hyderabad.
2 Shri R.S. Mani, DDG, NIC and Member of Technical Advisory Group of Election Commission of India (ECI), along with Prof. Rajat Moona, Dr. G. Siva Kumar and Dr. H. Krishnamurty, has been bestowed with ‘National Award’ under the Special Category for Providing Seamless IT Support to Election Commission of India by the Hon’ble Minister of Law and Justice Shri Kiren Rijiju at the 24th National Conference on eGovernance, Hyderabad, Telengana.
3 Shri I.P.S. Sethi, DDG, NIC briefed about DigiDhan Dashboard designed and developed by NIC that enables accurate reporting, monitoring, and analysis of various modes of digital payments and transactions across the country during the Plenary Session VI - India Techade: Digital Economy (Digital Payments - Building Citizens Confidence) at the 24th National Conference on eGovernance. The DigiDhan Dashboard also helps in tracking the growth of digital payment transactions in the country and will provide inputs for effective planning of digital payment promotional activities.
4 NIC Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu Centre received the National Award (Silver) for the successful implementation of the Integrated COVID Management System (ICMS) under the category “Usage of ICT in the Management of COVID-19” during the 24th National Conference on eGovernance in Hyderabad. NIC DNHDD Centre was chosen among 431 entries as the ICMS application enabled the UT Administration to control public access within the region using ePass, monitor the movement of industrial workers’ and track the entry of COVID-19 suspects into the union territory.
5 eShramik Seva project developed by NIC for the Labour Department, Chhattisgarh has been conferred with the National Award (Gold) under the category ‘Universalising Access including eServices.’ The main objective of the eShramik Seva project is to support labourers and establishments and protect their economic, physical, and social interests through various acts. It contributes towards industrial development by building harmony between workers and management.
6 NIC Bandipora received the National Award for eGovernance at the 24th National Conference on eGovernance held in Hyderabad, Telangana. The award has been conferred for developing the innovative digital product “Panchayat Development Index”. It captures the movement in development at the grass-root level and analyses the overall impact of central schemes.
7 eMARG application developed by NIC Madhya Pradesh received the National eGovernance Award conferred by DARPG in Hyderabad, Telangana. eMarg is an enterprise-level eGovernance solution to track the maintenance of rural roads constructed under the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY). Additional State Information Officer Madhya Pradesh, briefed about eMARG to Hon’ble Union Minister of State (IC), Ministry of Science & Technology, Dr Jitendra Singh at the 24th National conference on eGovernance on visiting eMARG booth.
8 NIC Srinagar District, J&K has been conferred with the National Award (Gold) by the Hon’ble Union Minister of State (IC), Ministry of Science & Technology, Dr Jitendra Singh, under the category of ‘COVID-19 Management with the Use of Technology’ during the 24th National Conference on eGovernance in Hyderabad, Telangana. The various innovative IT measures taken by NIC Srinagar, such as Contact Tracing, Geo-fencing and Quarantine Management, helped the Jammu and Kashmir Administration in the containment of COVID-19.
9 Hon’ble Union Minister of State (IC), Dr. Jitendra Singh and Hon’ble IT Minister, Telangana, Shri K.T. Rama Rao felicitated “Virtual Courts’ with the National Award for eGovernance 2020–2021 (Gold), under the “Excellence in Process re-engineering for Digital Transformation’ category at the 24th National Conference on eGovernance. The application aims at eliminating the physical presence of litigants or lawyers in the courtroom and allows for the adjudication of cases on a virtual platform.
