---
title: "NEET-UG – National Eligibility cum Entrance Test for Under Graduates"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2013"
pages: [20, 21]
author: "Manoj Saxena, Sachin Prabhakar and Megha Gupta"
section: "e-Gov Products & Services"
---

## NEET-UG – National Eligibility cum Entrance Test for Under Graduates

Edited by Mohan Das Viswam
Pursuant to the notification published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary dated 21st December, 2010, the Medical Council of India, with the approval of the Central Government amended the regulations on Graduate Medical Education 1997 and made provisions for a Single Eligibility cum Entrance Examination, namely, National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET) for admission to MBBS courses in each academic year.
The Dental Council of India also amended the BDS Course Regulations 2007 and notified in the Gazette of India Extraordinary dated 31st May, 2012 that admission to BDS courses in each academic year shall be through National Eligibility Cum Entrance Test (NEET). Accordingly, the CBSE in collaboration with NIC has conducted the National Eligibility cum Entrance Test for admission to MBBS and BDS courses.
In order to conduct NEET, a web based application (http://cbseneet.nic.in) was developed by NIC, which facilitates the following:
• Online applying by candidates
• Printing bank e-Challan for depositing fee in banks across India
• Paying the examination fee through Electronic Payment Gateway using credit/debit cards
• Post Office e-Challan for depositing fee in Post Offices across India
• Checking application status
• Online correction in filled particulars
• Downloading Admit Card
Apart from this, information on various notices, facilitation centres, information at a glance, RTI, useful links and contact information have been provided on the website. The result of the NEET will be published on the http://results.nic.in website with a link on the NEET website. The website provides information about latest news, important dates, download and help.
Overview Of NEET-UG
NEET-UG is a web application for the candidates, who wish to appear for the entrance examination enabling them to get admission in MBBS/BDS, with modules as per details given in the table.
Module Functionality
Apply Online Interface for aspirants of MBBS/BDS who can submit an on-line application form giving personal details including the option for mode of examination in 6 regional languages in addition to Hindi, English and Urdu and option for All India Quota Merit, 3 states of domicile, AFMC and Private Medical Colleges. Also, they can opt 3 examination centers as per their order.
Print Bank e-Challan Interface for downloading and printing e-Challan for depositing fee in banks and post offices across India
Pay the Examination Fee Interface for submitting fee deposition details or submitting fee through Electronic Payment Gateway from debit/credit cards
Re-print Confirmation Page Interface for re-printing the confirmation page in case the confirmation page generated by aspirants has been misplaced/lost
Forgot Registration Number Interface for displaying authentication based registration no. if aspirant has forgot the same
Print Address Slip Interface for generating candidates’ address slips which are to be utilized for posting the confirmation page to CBSE; duly signed, with thumb impressions along with their photographs
Application Status Interface for checking their physically received application in CBSE. This data is updated periodically as lots of applications are received by CBSE.
Online Correction in Particulars Interface for one time correction in personal information submitted during on-line application submission
Reprint Online Correction Slip Interface for generating correction slip, if correction is made in particulars.
Download Admit Card Interface for downloading Admit Cards before appearing in the NEET-UG examination
Important Proforma with Post Card size Photograph to be handed over to the invigilator Interface for downloading format for submitting an additional postcard size photograph of the candidate in the examination hall
Current Status
NEET-UG examination has been succesfully conducted for the first time in the country by CBSE in technical collaboration with NIC. The process was started in December, 2012 and around 8 lakh online applications have been submitted and around 7.5 lakh admit cards have been downloaded. The NEET-UG exam was conducted on 05/05/2013 for the whole country except for Karnataka, due to assembly elections. The examination in Karnataka has been conducted on 18/05/2013. Besides, supplementary NEET-UG exam in Urdu has been conducted on 26/05/2013.
Technology Adopted
NEET-UG has been developed with Windows Server 2008 as Operating System, MS SQL Server 2008 Enterprise as Database, Internet Information Server as Web Server and .NET framework 4.0 as a development tool. Deployment architecture of the same has been adopted with Disaster Recovery Architecture.
Impact
The NEET-UG was conducted for the first time in our country this year. It's success and popularity has boosted up the confidence level of both CBSE and NIC, and has become a motivational factor for developing more technology solutions for conducting various entrance examinations efficiently.
