---
title: "NIC Angul: New yet Exemplary"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 1997"
pages: [19, 20, 21]
author: null
section: null
---

## NIC Angul: New yet Exemplary

Angul, a centrally located District in the State of Orissa came into existence on April 2, 1993. The District covers a geographical area of 6347 square kilometres and supports a population of about 9.61 lakhs. Angul has been further divided into four sub-divisions, five tehsils and eight blocks. It is although new but strategically most advanced District. It has gained importance because of the presence of large industrial units and highest return of revenue that it pays to the Government due to the vast coal mines located in its abode. Big industries such as National Thermal Company (NALCO); Mahanadi Coalfields Limited (MCL); National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC); Fertilizer Corporation of India (FCI); Mukund Iron & Steel etc. are situated in the District.

THE ESTABLISHMENT The National Informatics Centre Angul District Unit was inaugurated on January 1995 by the then Collector and District Magistrate. The foremost responsibility of the District Centre was to create mass awareness of Informatics culture among the officials of District Administration and other District level Departments. In this regard a series of meetings and training programmes were conducted in the District. The effort soon bore fruits.

MAJOR PROJECTS With a planned and organized approach, today within a short span of two years the Angul District Centre has already implemented about 20 Information Systems. One of the major Project undertaken by the District Unit is the "Total Literacy Campaign (TLC) Monitoring System" developed for the Zila Sakhyarata Samiti (ZSS), Angul. The System was developed specifically to monitor the Block-wise literacy drive work in the District. The Software facilitates data entry, report generation in every fortnight for reviewing the progress made in every Block of the District. The Master Information System (MIS) report on TLC has information regarding the number of centres available for TLC Project; number of male, female (including SC/ST) identified and enrolled in the centres; regular people continuing their study; number of people completing 1st phase, 2nd phase and 3rd phase of education etc. After the successful implementation of TLC Project, the Government of India sanctioned to undertake Post Literacy Campaign (PLC) for this District. Both the Projects have helped the ZSS to implement these schemes in a more organized and effective manner. Another major Project which drew great applause from all quarters was the implementation of the DISNIC-PLAN Project. In this Project computerized analytical reports for sectors such as health, education, agriculture, industry, forest, social welfare, civil supply, transport and communication etc. are available in a comprehensive manner. This has proved to be highly beneficial and time saving for the aforementioned Sectors. The Public Grievances Cell (PGCELL) Monitoring System has been developed by the NIC Angul District Centre, for the PGCELL of the Collectorates Office. The District Centre has also developed the Arms License Monitoring System for the Judicial Department of the Collectorates. The System helps in generating reports on the type of arms such as rifle, revolver, pistol etc. being issued to all the police stations in the District. This helps the concerned Department to easily monitor the issue of arms license in the District. Angul has also been selected at National Level for Land Records Computerization work. The site preparation work for setting up of a new Land Records Computer Cell adjacent to the NIC District Unit is in full swing. The required Software called Bhulekh has already been installed. Staff from each tehsil has been trained for data entry and other related work in Oriya language. In this Software the final Khatiyan (Record of Rights or ROR) has been accepted by the Director of Land Records, State Government as the standard input form for data entry. The data in a Khatiyan consists of land holders details, plot details, plot remarks details etc. Through the System computerized ROR can be generated and handed over to the person concerned. The records can be updated as and when required without any problem. Besides these Projects a number of MIS such as Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS); Revenue Administration Information System; Small Savings Information System; Old Age Pension (OAP) and Old Disabled Pension (ODP) Monitoring System etc. have been successfully developed and implemented by the Unit.

NICNET CONNECTIVITY By providing NICNET connectivity to organizations such as National Tree Growers Co-operative Federation Limited (NTGCF); the Unit has already become one of the busiest Centres in the District. E-mail facility is also being provided from this Centre to various organization such as Fertilizers Co-operation of India (FCI) etc., located in the District.

NIC AT BLOCK LEVEL Under a major step towards computerization, the Kaniha Block of Angul District has been chosen as one of the pilot Blocks for computerization. This marks the beginning of Block level expansion of NIC in the State. Site preparation work has already begun. The Block will also be hooked up to NICNET.

Implementation of MIS based Systems, NICNET connectivity to Public Sectors and Industries located in the District and Block level computerization etc. has made the NIC District Centre Angul a nerve Centre of the District which serves the general public; academicians; administrators; policy makers all alike in an organized and planned manner.

The NIC Angul District Centre, Orissa
