---
title: "NIC AT ELITEX’2004 Enhancing e-readiness"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2004"
pages: [8]
author: "H.P Srivastava, NIC HQ"
section: "Special Feature"
---

## NIC AT ELITEX’2004 Enhancing e-readiness

Department of Information Technology (DIT), Ministry of Communications & IT has been promoting research and development in the areas of Information Technology and Electronics through various academic institutions, industries and research labs spread all over the country. To facilitate the dissemination of information on Technologies and Products developed among the users and industry, the Department organizes Electronics and Information Technology Exposition (ELITEX) as an annual event. This provides an opportunity and a forum where participants can swap ideas and experiences in their field. This year, ELITEX-2004, the seminar cum exhibition was organized during April 26-27, 2004 at Indian Habitat Center, New Delhi. The theme of ELITEX-2004 was “Technology Vision : India in 2010”. Dr.R. A. Mashelkar, DG, CSIR & Secretary, DSIR inaugurated the exposition and Shri K. K. Jaswal, Secretary, Department of Information Technology, delivered the keynote address. In the seminar, Dr. N Vijayaditya, DG(NIC) Chaired the session “Human Computer Interface” addressed by various eminent speakers. The NIC Stall The NIC Stall in the ELITEX exhibition was set up to display the product and services implemented to facilitate informatics development programs in government at national, state, district and even at village level. A multimedia presentation of various NIC services was made available on the plasma screen to the visitors. Besides this, a large number of posters and brochures, including a special information docket covering details of the various products and services on display were also made available. In addition, NIC provided services of video conferencing and internet connectivity to the event. A Large number of visitors participated in the proceedings through various NIC video conferencing centers. Sh. Arun Shourie, the then Hon’ble Minister of Communications & IT, Dr. R. A. Mashelkar, DG, CSIR & Secretary, DSIR and Shri K. K. Jaswal, Secretary DIT, visited the NIC stall. Dr N Vijayaditya, DG(NIC) and Shri.T A.Khan, DDG (NIC) demonstrated and explained about various projects and services being provided by NIC. A Software Product developed by NIC namely “Manus Granthavali for Manuscript Cataloguing” was released by the Chief Guest Dr. R. A. Mashelkar. There was an overwhelming response of visitors from various organizations at the NIC stall and the stall was awarded the first prize among the exhibiters. The Display Following Applications / Products were displayed at NIC stall: € | Land Records Computerization Project ™ DHARANI - Goa ™ HimBhoomi - Himachal Pradesh € | E- Governance Applications ™ INFOGRAM IT based Services at Village Panchayats, Goa ™ GRAM SAMPARK Rural E-Governance, Madhya Pradesh ™ NAGARSOFT Electronic delivery of Property related Services, Uttar Pradesh. ™ E-PANCHAYAT Comprehensive ICT based Solutions at Village Level. (Village level Self Government), Andhra Pradesh ™ E-HOSPITAL Managing Health Services, Andhra Pradesh ™ MAS Municipal Administrative Citizen Centric Services - Goa ™ LOK MITRA Government to Citizen Portal, Himachal Pradesh ™ E-gram Suvidha Geomatics based Facility Management Information System € | IT for Masses ™ Community Information Centres (CIC) to provide Citizen Centric Services ™ Competitive Examination Counselling System (CECS) for All India Engineering Entrance Examination (AIEEE) € | GIS based applications ™ Manus Granthavali for Manuscript Cataloguing ™ Monitoring of Social Sector Projects ™ National Spatial Database ™ GIS based Emergency Planning and Response System for Major Industrial Cluster € | E-Commerce applications ™ Electronic Commerce(EC)/Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) for Trade ™ E – License @ DGFT ™ Remote EDI System € | MIS Applications ™ Prison Management Information System (PMIS), Tihar Jail ™ Food and Civil Supplies Information System (FCSIS), Maharashtra € | Central/State Government Portal ™ India Image – Gateway to Government of India Info & services over the web ™ IntraNIC – Intranet Portal to empower Employees in an organisation. Live Webcast The proceedings of the entire event were webcast live by NIC through the website http://elitexlive.nic.in. A special webcast control room was set up for this purpose and the webcast was also shown at the NIC stall for the visitors to know the proceedings of the sessions in main auditorium and other halls. The proceedings could also be viewed through Archives as ‘Video-on Demand” after the event. IN THE WORDS OF DR R.A MASHELKAR, DG (CSIR) AND SECRETARY (DSIR) : “ I was immensely impressed with the stall of National Informatics Centre. The impact of IT on a wide ranging areas that will shape the destiny was evident through the most innovative and creative endeavours of NIC that were displayed. My heartiest congratulations to the entire family of NIC. We are truly proud of you”.
