---
title: "NIC wins big at Digital Technology Sabha Awards 2022"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2022"
pages: [48]
author: null
section: "Accolades"
---

## NIC wins big at Digital Technology Sabha Awards 2022

1 NIC Chattisgarh wins Digital Technology Sabha 2022 Award for their Innovative Assessment tools – NICIer and TelePractice – under Enterprise Applications category. The award was received by Dr. A.K. Hota, A.K. Somasekhar, Lalita Verma, alongside Sudhish M., Assistant Director, Education Department, Chhattisgarh. NICler for MCQ assessment and TelePractice for oral assessment have changed the way formative assessment is done. They automatically capture lakhs of students’ answers to different questions, which can be translated by data analytics for adaptive learning. Oral assessment is an essential part of any academic activity, including school education. Conducting oral practise in one-to-one mode is time-consuming. This project has provided a technical solution to conduct oral quizzes simultaneously for multiple students using the Telegram app as the front end and Python for backend processing. Team Members: • Dr. A.K. Hota, Scientist-G • A.K. Somasekhar, Scientist-F • Lalita Verma, Scientist-B.
2 The Web Portals for Jan Shikshan Sansthan Scheme (JSS) and SANKALP have been awarded Digital Technology Sabha Awards 2022 under the category of Enterprise Applications. Both the web portals were developed by NIC under the guidance of Shri I.P.S. Sethi, DDG & HoG, MSDE. JSS is a non-formal adult education programme aimed at improving vocational skills and living standards of workers. The beneficiaries of this scheme are non-literates, jail inmates, unskilled and unemployed youth from SC / ST / OBC / Minority / Divyang / Women, especially from the underprivileged sections of rural India. It is implemented through NGOs and has a Darpan ID with annual recurring grant from the Government of India. On the other hand, SANKALP aims to improve the people by providing short term skill training via strengthened institutions and by bringing better market connectivity and inclusion of marginalised sections of society. Team Members: • Shri I.P.S. Sethi, DDG & HoG, MSDE • Shri Sanjay Kumar Sinha, STD • Smt. Neeta Chauhan, TD.
3 NIC Chhattisgarh bags Digital Technology Sabha Award 2022 for Post-Matric scholarship project of Chhattisgarh Tribal Department under the Enterprise Application Category. The Post-matric scholarship portal of Chhattisgarh Tribal Department aids the categorised students of various graduate degree, post graduate degree, diploma and post graduate diploma courses in filing application for scholarship and involves all process up to transfer of scholarship in their bank accounts. Shri Satyesh Kumar Sharma, Technical Director, NIC Chhattisgarh received the award briefed about the product in the presence of other award-winning team members including Shri Saurabh Dubey, Scientist-C, Smt. Jyoti Sharma, Scientist-B of NIC, Shri Saurabh Verma and Ms. Saziya Tabassum from development team. Dr. A. K. Hota (DDG & SIO), who joined on the occasion, congratulated the whole team. Team Members: • Shri Satyesh Sharma, Scientist-E • Shri Saurabh Dubey, Scientist-C • Smt Jyoti Sharma, Scientist-B • Shri Saurabh Verma, Developer • Ms. Saziya Tabassum, Developer.
