---
title: "NIC Tawang District Centre - Forging Ahead with Hope"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2001"
pages: [17, 18, 19]
author: null
section: "In the Limelight"
---

## NIC Tawang District Centre - Forging Ahead with Hope

Tawang District, situated in the Western most part of Arunachal Pradesh, is also know as a Tourists' Paradise with snow covered hills. It is situated at a height of more than 10,000 feet and blessed with the second largest monastery in Asia. The Distt has abundant natural beauty in the form of more than 100 lakes, hot springs and waterfalls and is also famous for the Tawang war memorial dedicated to the warriors of 1962 war who made supreme sacrifice. The district has a population of 28,287 according to the 1991 census. People of this area mostly practice agriculture and horticulture activities. The percentage of literate population is 27.14%. The NIC Tawang district unit was established in the year 1994. As in case of most of the districts, initially it was tough to motivate the people, but within a span on six years, it has brought a vast change in the attitude of the staff of the district administration. Now, the situation is such that the administration is getting almost all the database related works computerized. More and more people are getting trained in different fields of computers and the Deputy Commissioner’s office and NIC is getting connected with LAN so that the computerized activities in the various departments related to the District Commissioner's Office can be carried out from any place at a time. As a part of its constant endeavour to bring about total computerization in the District's Activities, NIC Tawang Unit has developed and implemented a number of useful Software Packages and carried out computerization projects, some of which are highlighted below: Processing of monthly salary, monthly expenditure statement and annual budget for the Deputy Commissioners Office has been fully computerized. Registered Motor Vehicle Information System has been implemented which helps in getting any information about a particular vehicle like Tax paid so far, year of manufacture etc. Below Poverty Line Information System developed by NIC Tawang is being used all over the state to know the exact number of people living below poverty line, assistance received, migration etc. The Software developed on preparation of Electoral Rolls is one of the major achievements for the district and based on this roll, the 1999 election of MPs & MLAs were held. Tawang was the first district in Arunachal Pradesh to prepare this roll and the election commission of Arunachal Pradesh appreciated Tawang District for its efforts. A Package on Relief Measures for Crop Damage etc generates a report, which helps the District Administration to avoid any discrepancy in the distribution of money. A Software has been developed for the effective implementation and monitoring of DRDA’s schemes. Employees Information System for education department is helping them in maintaining service record book of each employee in the district. A Package for maintaining five year pay roll saving scheme of the employee of various govt. offices has been developed by the NIC Unit. The Border Area Development Program Information System monitors the amount spent on each scheme in the Blocks and Villages etc. An Employment Exchange Information System has been developed to know the unemployment status of the district, the jobs applied for, level of education required for various jobs etc. A software Package developed on File Monitoring System helps district administration to get rid of pending files in a short span of time. A Grazing permit database assists the district administration in avoiding duplicacy and saves time in printing of grazing permit certificates for the grazers of Indo-China and Indo-Bhutan borders. A database has been developed on the pending criminal cases which helps to identify the pending cases with the Judicial Magistrates, nature of judgement given for a particular case etc. Tawang being the remotest district of Arunachal Pradesh., the communication infrastructure is tough to build and maintain but still NIC has ensured that almost all the officers of the district are effectively using the NICNET services. The district receives a large number of mails from the Secretariat and other departments. NICNET connectivity has also been given to DRDA, Planning and Police Department for easy reception and transmission of messages. Especially at the time of Elections, Budgets, CBSE examination result declaration NICNET was used extensively for the collection and dissemination of data. Still in budding stage, NIC Tawang District Unit has a long way to go. But its efforts over the years look very promising for achieving the aim of spreading informatics culture till the very roots of the District.
