---
title: "OFFICIAL WEBSITE OF FISHERIES & ANIMAL RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT (FARD) DEPARTMENT, GOVT. OF ODISHA INAUGURATED"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2014"
pages: [46]
author: "Dr. A. K. Hota, Odisha"
section: "In the News"
---

## OFFICIAL WEBSITE OF FISHERIES & ANIMAL RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT (FARD) DEPARTMENT, GOVT. OF ODISHA INAUGURATED

The official website of FARD Department, Govt. of Odisha was inaugurated by Shri Pradeep Maharathy, Hon’ble Minister, Agriculture, Fisheries and Animal Resources Development Department, Government of Odisha on 31st July, 2014 at Conference Hall of National Informatics Centre, Odisha State Centre, Bhubaneswar. Other dignitaries present during the occasion were Shri Bishnupada Sethi, IAS, Commissioner-cum-Secretary, FARD, Shri P. Krishna Mohan, IFS, Director, Fisheries, Shri Devi Prasad Panda, Director of AH&VS, Shri S.K.Mohapatra, Senior Technical Director & SIO I/C, Dr. R.N.Behera, Sr. Technical Director, Shri Ajit Kumar Pattanayak, PSA, Shri Dhananjay Hembram, Joint Secretary along with other senior officers from FARD and NIC. The website is developed and hosted by NIC Odisha State Center, Bhubaneswar using state-of-art technology for providing reliable information about the department and its various citizen-centric welfare activities to the stakeholders. The important sections covered in the website are About Us, Objective, Who’s Who, Organogram, various schemes, Plan & Budget, Acts-Rules-Policies, Statistics, Photo Gallery, Video Gallery along with citizen centric sections such as Orders & Notifications, Forms, Publications are available. Links to various Central/State Government websites i.e. RTI, odisha.gov.in, india.gov.in have also been provided. Speaking on the occasion, Hon’ble Minister Shri Pradeep Maharathy appreciated the efforts of NIC for development of the portal. With new system in place, farmers from different parts of the state can communicate with the department though this website and able to get information regarding the different schemes of the department. Shri Bishnupada Sethi, IAS, Commissioner-cum-Secretary, FARD, appreciated the NIC team for their co-operation and timely completion of the website. He also thanked officials for their valuable suggestions/contributions. Dr. R.N. Behera, STD gave a vivid presentation on the website. He highlighted the objectives of the website and described how it helps fish/cattle farmers in getting up-to-date information regarding different schemes/subsidies of the department. The event concluded with vote of thanks from Shri Dhanjay Hembram.
