---
title: "Online Marriage Registration in Rajasthan inaugurated"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2016"
pages: [47]
author: "AMIT AGARWAL, JAIPUR"
section: "In the News"
---

## Online Marriage Registration in Rajasthan inaugurated

Hon’ble Chief Minister of Rajasthan, Smt. Vasundhara Raje launched the Online Marriage Regis-tration through Pehchan Portal (http://pehchan.raj.nic.in) on 21.03.2016 at NIC Stall in Birla Au-ditorium, Jaipur on the occasion of Rajasthan IT Day. The Chief Minister distributed Digitally Signed Marriage Certificates to 6 couples. Shri Akhil Arora, Secretary, Plan-ning Rajasthan, Smt. Indu Gupta, Dy. Director General & SIO NIC Rajasthan, Shri Tarun Toshniwal, ASIO and Sr. Techni-cal Director, NIC Rajasthan, Shri Om Prakash Bairwa, Chief Registrar (Birth-Death) & Director, Economics and Statistics, Rajasthan and other dignitaries were present on the occasion. Blessing the couples, the CM said that the delivery of digital-ly signed marriage registration certificates which strengthens the marriage registration process is a revolutionary step in the State through which a large number of citizens will be benefit-ed. The concept of bilingual marriage registration certificates was appreciated and congratulated SIO, NIC and his team for the successful development of the portal.
The portal enables easy and quick registration of marriages and to print the Registration Certificates. Citizens can apply for marriage registration to Registrar office that can generates the certificate through Pehchan. Pehchan is a unified web portal for Birth, Death, Still Birth and Marriage Registration in Rajast-han. Alternatively, citizens can also apply through the nearest e-Mitra/CSC kiosk and get the personal appearance date on which the concerned Registrar verify the documents/details and issue Registration Certificate. Citizen has the facility to au-thenticate his/her application through Adhaar or Bhamashah-number. In case of non-availability of these, identity proof can be uploaded along with joint photograph of the couple. There are about 12,500 Birth & Death Registrars and about 10,000 Marriage Registrars in Rajasthan.
Portal has role-based logins for Registrars, Sub Registrars, Block Statistical Officers, District Registrars and Chief Reg-istrars. The portal has been integrated with UID for Adhaar authentication and so far registered about 50 lakh Birth/ Death certificates. Registrars are provided facility to digitally sign the certificates. SMS alert is generated to applicant on registration and digitally signed certificate is delivered to the applicant’s email id. Portal is providing about 100 types of monitoring re-ports to District Registrars and Chief Registrar. Apart from the facility to search the registration online, the portal has also the facility to maintain legacy registration with the original regis-tration number. Toll-free helpline is available at the portal to answer queries of citizens regarding registration.
