---
title: "Prajavani : An e-Gov initiative for People's Voice through Local Language in Andhra Pradesh"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2010"
pages: [8, 9]
author: "Dr V.V. Venkata Ramana"
section: "E-Gov Products & Services"
---

## Prajavani : An e-Gov initiative for People's Voice through Local Language in Andhra Pradesh

Prajavani is an e-Governance initiative by the combined efforts of District Administration and National Informatics Centre in Ranga Reddy District (AP, India). The initiative is not only giving a practical shape to the Right to Information Act, but it is also creating job opportunities for the educated but unemployed youth of Ranga Reddy. Prajavani is a unique public private partnership program, which gives citizens an opportunity to interact with the Government without coming to any government office. NIC A.P. State Centre has developed and implemented this first of its kind e-Governance initiative in local language - Telugu. It has been Started as a Pilot at Mominpet in Ranga Reddy District on 16th Dec 2005 and it is now running successfully in 15 (out of 23) districts. It all happened only because of the ease of use and the Collectorate's active participation. Excerpt of the letter from Collector and DM Dr. B. Janardhan Reddy, IAS, Anantapur. “Through Prajavani Transparency increased, accessibility to information increased, response levels have gone up, time taken to address reduced.” Prajavani operates through a citizen interface Kiosk or any internet node. In some districts the applications are fed at a separate counter in the Collectorates, while in some other districts the guest login is not allowed. Prajavani can be accessed at http://prajavani.ap.nic.in/ In some districts the Kiosks are operated by unemployed educated youth selected by the Collectorates. These youth are given loans to establish the kiosks. In any mode of implementation, a back office Call Centre at the collectorate acts as an interface between the Kiosk and the district administration. The User ids and passwords are allotted by the DIOs at the respective NIC Centres and the NIC State Centre gives over all support to all these districts implementing the Prajavani. Highlights:  First G2C, G2G application in Local language;  Grievance can be lodged from kiosks;  Online status from the website;  Streamlined action by officials;  Employment opportunities. Advantages:  Fast redressal of the petitions;  Citizen interaction with the Government online without physical presence at the office;  Saves Time and Money for the common man;  Improves bureaucratical efficiency and transparency. Types of users in Prajavani: Kiosk Operators are spread in whole district i.e., Division Level, Mandal Level and village Level etc (e.g. existing RSDP, Rural E-Seva Centres can act as Prajavani Kiosk Centres). They enter the petition into the Prajavani and generate the receipt to the petitioners, assists the petitioners to know the status of their petitions. Prajavani Operators work under supervision of Petition Monitoring Section at Collectorate. They play a major role in timely disposal of complaints. They check daily unmarked petitions and they send to concerned officer and also make time frame for disposal. Prajavani operators feed the disposals in the computer and complaints get disposed off. Officers- Login ID and Password has been allotted to officers like MROs, MDOs who enter the action taken reports on complaints directly in Prajavani site using officer's logins. Those who do not have internet facility can send the action taken reports to PMC Section for updation. They can perform Technical administrative activities including Create Logins, Add and Modify Officer information etc. Super Users and Guest: Each District has one Super User login, under the control of District Informatics Officer. A guest login is created for general public; anyone can enter using a guest account, as designated by the respective district authorities. One can lodge the petition from this user and also know the status of the petition, accordingly. Workflow of the application: Petitioner:  Submits a grievance/petition at the nearest kiosk and gets acknowledgement;  Can know the status of the petition at any Kiosk;  If petitioner is not satisfied with the response from the government, he/she can re-submit the petition for review. Kiosk Operator:  Enters the petition into the Prajavani through internet;  Generates acknowledgement to the petitioner;  Assists the petitioner to know the status. Departmental Official:  Accesses the Prajavani regularly for new petitions referred to his department;  Monitors the target dates;  Updates the Prajavani portal with interim or final replies. This e-Governance application is implemented on State SAN and the districts can use the existing personal computer and internet to implement it. Implementation Status (as in Jan' 2010): Districts which have successfully implemented Prajavani are: Rangareddy, Kadapa, Adilabad, Nizamabad, Karimnagar,Guntur,Anantapur, Medak, Warangal, Nalgonda, West Godavari, Srikakulam, Visakapatnam, Krishna, Mahabub Nagar. In Anantapur district, Prajavani has been augmented with an SMS application, through which the citizen can know the status of the grievances by sending an SMS. Prajavani was showcased as one of the smartest e-Gov application in Local Language in Elitex-2008 at New Delhi. In coming days it is sure that the remaining districts also will implement Prajavani.
