---
title: "Project AMBER Empowers Women and Underprivileged Groups with Cloud Skills Training"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2023"
pages: [46]
author: null
section: "International eGov Update"
---

## Project AMBER Empowers Women and Underprivileged Groups with Cloud Skills Training

In a significant collaborative effort, the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) has partnered with Generation India Foundation (GIF) and Amazon Web Services India (AWS India) to launch Project AMBER. This initiative aims to provide cloud skills training to 1,500 learners, connecting them with valuable employment opportunities. The project falls under the SANKALP program of MSDE and carries a specific focus on women and underprivileged groups. The project comes at a time when the interest and participation of women in digital skills training have been on a steady rise. Recognizing the importance of bridging the gender gap in the tech industry, the collaboration between the government and the industry becomes crucial in providing women with the necessary resources, mentorship, and networking opportunities to establish sustainable livelihoods and careers. Project AMBER is a joint undertaking by the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC), operating under MSDE, and GIF. It is co-funded by MSDE through the SANKALP program and private philanthropy. The overarching goal of the project is to train 30,000 youths, with 50% of them being women. As part of this partnership, learners participate in AWS (re/Start), a workforce development program tailored for unemployed and underemployed individuals. This program covers fundamental AWS cloud skills and provides practical career guidance, including resume writing and interview preparation. Learners undergo training in various technologies, including Linux, Python, networking, security, and relational databases. Moreover, the program covers the costs for learners to take the AWS Cloud Practitioner Certification exam, a credential widely recognized in the industry. This certification validates their cloud skills and knowledge, and it also connects them with job interview opportunities in the cloud or IT sector with local employers. Shri Atul Kumar Tiwari, Secretary, MSDE, emphasized the transformative power of automation and technological advancements in shaping job opportunities and driving economic growth in India. He highlighted the importance of collaboration with AWS re/Start to provide cloud computing skills and expand career possibilities for women in the technology sector. He noted that the initiatives is instrumental in nurturing the potential of India's youth in the evolving landscape of Industry 4.0 and Web 3.0. Amit Mehta, Head of Business Development for Education & Training at AWS India, praised the collaboration between AWS re/Start, MSDE, NSDC, and GIF. He highlighted how AWS re/Start not only helps individuals launch successful cloud careers but also supports organizations in gaining a competitive edge by providing them with in-demand talent. This collaborative effort aims to create a diverse and robust pipeline of young cloud computing professionals, ultimately contributing to the digital transformation of organizations across India.
