---
title: "RAJASTHAN STATE INNOVATION COUNCIL ORGANIZED 2 DAYS NATIONAL SEMINAR ON INNOVATIONS"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2014"
pages: [45]
author: "CHANDAN SEN, Rajasthan"
section: "In the News"
---

## RAJASTHAN STATE INNOVATION COUNCIL ORGANIZED 2 DAYS NATIONAL SEMINAR ON INNOVATIONS

A tow day Rajasthan National Seminar on innovations has been organized by Rajasthan State Innovation Council (SInC) at Science Park, Jaipur on the 23rd-24th September 2013. The seminar was an effort to provide a platform for deliberation and dissemination of thoughts and ideas pertaining to innovations. Departmental representatives, NGOs and grass root innovators of state demonstrated & exhibited their innovations in the seminar. Students of various colleges also participated actively and demonstrated their innovative projects to the participants. The conference was addressed by many VIPs including Shri Sam Pitroda, Chairman National Innovation Council and Advisor to the Prime Minister, Shri B.K. Gairola, Mission Director (e-Governance), Shri Arun Maira, Member Planning Commission and Shri Kiran Karnik, Member National Innovation Council. Other key speakers in the seminar were Chief Secretary, Rajasthan Shri C.K. Mathew, Shri V.S. Vyas Chairman SInC and Deputy Chairman State Planning Board, ACS (RD & PR), Shri C.S. Rajan, Principal Secretary Planning, Shri Rakesh Verma, Principal Secretary, Horticulture, Shri Dinesh Kumar Goyal. NIC has made elaborate arrangements to make the event successful. Lease line has been arranged and live NICNET IPs was routed to the venue. Video conference facilities were established in the Science Park for important VC session of Shri Sam Pitroda live from California (US), Dr. B. K. Gairola and Shri Arun Maira from Planning Commission, New Delhi. Live interaction of the dignitaries with Pilot Gram Panchayats of Ajmer was also organized. Session on live interaction with Pilot Gram Panchayats was taken by Smt. Indu Gupta, DDG & State Informatics Officer, NIC Rajasthan. Smt. Gupta briefed the panel and participants that 10 Gram Panchayats of Srinagar Block in Ajmer districts are connected through fiber as a Proof of Concept (POC). In addition to that 21 schools are also provided with Wi-Fi connectivity extended from the fiber terminated at Gram Panchayat. All the locations are strengthened by providing necessary computer accessories. Gram Panchayats are providing various e-governance services including Telemedicine to the rural citizens. Sarpanchs from Gram Panchayat Kanpura, Srinagar and Tihari were present along with the some beneficiaries during the Video Conference session and answered the questions of panel guests and other participants attending the seminar. In the live Video Conference from Panchayats, Sarpanch spoke about the benefits of the fiber connectivity to the citizens. Computerized Copies of Land Records, Birth & Death Certificates are being issued from Gram Panchayats. Telemedicine is being conducted from Gram Panchayat for Medical Consultation. IT-Manager posted at Panchayat is educating school’s students and elders. Students are using internet for their studies, results and for getting news and information. Two days seminar was also hosted by NIC on http://webcast.gov.in. For transmission of the event to over 300 destinations across the state, NIC has also supported for Live Audio/Video feed to SATCOM.
