---
title: "Rajasthan- A Roadmap of e-Governance"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2008"
pages: [10, 11, 12, 13]
author: "Indu Gupta"
section: "From the States"
---

## Rajasthan- A Roadmap of e-Governance

The Government of Rajasthan is taking all possible measures for spreading e-Governance through out the state covering all the sectors with a view to provide hassle free, transparent and efficient service to its citizens. Down the track, major managerial and technological challenges have been successfully tackled through various “mission mode” projects. In one line, Rajasthan is forging ahead with all the modern e-Governance amenities necessary for an international status. The Nature and scale of e-Governance initiatives planned within the domain of the State Governments, present a considerable enhancement in the aspiration level of government. Along with the panoramic outlook of the state simply mesmerizing everyone; with lofty hills of Aravali's and the golden sand dunes of the Great Indian Desert, Rajasthan has identified ICT as a major trust area for its growth and development. The NIC unit, in close proximity with State Government, has been carrying out the various ICT projects efficiently and within the stipulated time period. Major activities covered are: ¡ Establishing ICT Infrastructure ¡ Analysis, Design, Development, Consultancy and Deployment of ICT solutions ¡ Capacity Building and reducing the Digital Divide ¡ Innovations in evolving low cost ICT solutions ¡ Assisting in implementing Mission Mode Projects The inauguration of first FIR generated by the CIPA in Rajasthan in the presence of DGP, GOR DG, NIC and SIO Rajasthan at Jaipur Major e-Governance projects ? CIPA So far 320 Police Stations of 11 districts have been computerised. Exhaustive training is imparted to equip the police personnels with project related intricacies. All the property files have been translated in Hindi thus facilitating the end user to use the Hindi version. ? Land Records Computerization The project is successfully operational in 247 Tehsils covering 42,665 villages. The copies of RoR are issued from Tehsil Computer Centre (Apna Khata Center) and also from District Data Centre. For all vital informations, citizens can now log at http://apnakhata.raj.nic.in and obtain RoR from 957 kiosks. ? Settlement Department Computerization For the modernization of survey process, a solution with state of art infrastructure has been established in Settlement Offices of 4 districts. The scanning and scaling of khasra maps is being done in-house and the documents “Milan Khasra”, “Khasra Patrak” and “Parcha Khautoni” can be generated and distributed to farmers. ? Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board (RSPCB) The board is in the process of computerizing its processes and the external interface with industries covering various sections like Cess, Technical, Laboratories, Accounts, Library, Budgeting, Legal, Receipt & Dispatch and Personnel. This will help in efficient functioning, streamline their internal processes and provide information to the industries and other stakeholders. ? Health Information system for Government (HEALING) A web-based application is developed and implemented for Medical Health & Family Welfare department to provide online monitoring mechanism for Disease Surveillance, Malaria Monitoring, Drug Control, Routine Immunization, Patient Record Management, Cold Chain Equipment Monitoring, Pulse Polio Monitoring, Acute Flaccid Paralysis Surveillance, Sterilization Monitoring, References Monitoring, Water Disinfections Monitoring, Disease Outbreak and Institutional Delivery Monitoring. ? Public Health Engineering Department (PHED) An MIS developed for effective management of Material, Personnel, Works Accounting, Works & Project, Water Quality, Scheme & Resource monitoring etc. In addition, Habitation Survey data has been computerized to help in resource planning. ? Rajasthan Legislative Assembly The web site (http://rajassembly.nic.in) provides list of business, question list (starred and unstarred) and debates for each day of the session. Public Representative Information System maintains details of all the public representatives so far in the state since creation of Rajasthan (in 1952) and positions/ministries held by them. Motions monitoring system is used to monitor the status of motions moved in the house for discussions. Hon'ble president Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil, Hon'ble Chief Minister of Rajasthan Smt. Vasundhara Raje, Hon'ble Speaker of Rajasthan Legislative Assembly Smt. Sumitra Singh, on the occasion of launching of online debates in the assembly hall of Rajasthan Legislative Assembly ? Dharohar Project An ambitious project of Department of Archaeology and Museums covers the three digitization initiatives viz: Museum Artifacts Digital Documentation, Manuscripts Digitization and Digital Video Documentation of temples and monuments covering special architectural features. It includes digital collection of 5000 rare artifacts of the 22 Government Museums and microfilming of selected manuscripts. ? e-Governance for Campaign Monitoring An application to monitor various campaigns like 'Prashasan Gaon ke Sang', 'Prashasan Shahron ke Sang' etc organized for quick redressal of public grievances. ?Integrated Pension System Implemented in the Directorate and 4 regional offices, the activities of pension processing covering generation of Pension Payment Order, Gratuity Payment Order, Cumulative Pension Order and Pension monitoring is carried through the system. ? Election Management System The application is in use for Parliamentary, Legislative, Local Bodies and Panchayat elections which covers pre-polling activities - nomination, polling party formation, counting party formation, area & zonal magistrate appointments, route chart preparation and post-polling activities - counting process, results processing and analysis. ? Old Age Pension System A system has been developed and implemented by generating computer-printed money orders for disbursement and monitoring of old age pension. ? Sainik Kalyan Board A web-based application serving the ex-servicemen and their dependents by making them aware of different welfare schemes run by state and central government and to reduce the delay in processing their applications for various schemes. ? RSCB-DCCB Bank A core banking solution is being implemented in the Head Office, Regional Offices and various branches across the state. NIC/NICSI has taken up the supply, installation, configuration, commissioning, testing and integration of the equipments for smooth functioning of the bank activities. ? Computerization of Consumer Forums (CONFONET) The project Implemented in State Consumer Commission and 33 District Fora, Covers activities like site preparation, hardware, software & application software installation. Exhaustive training has also been imparted to the officials of the department. ? Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) The application is being used for entering case details and generating various reports, registers and daily cause list. Cause List and Judgments are also available on the website : (http://judis.nic.in/dist_judis/PDF_ Retrieval_Main_Cat_jaipur.asp). ? Monitoring of Reporting of Birth & Death Registration This Web based application initiated and funded by UNICEF captures the Birth, Death and Still Birth data on various parameters at district level and generates various MIS reports for Department of Economics & Statistics ? Immigration Project NIC was entrusted with the responsibility of executing the project at the Munabao Railway Station in border district of Barmer Nearly 700 passengers pass through this system per week at immigration check posts. The full bench of Rajasthan High court Jaipur during the inaugural function of VC studio of Rajasthan High Court Jaipur. ? Mid day meal A web-based application has been designed, developed and implemented for the Directorate of Mid Day Meal to enable Micro level planning and management of the Mid Day Meal distribution in all the primary, upper Primary and secondary schools. ? e-Zila This integrated software caters to the needs of different functional areas of the Collectorate. Some of the functional areas are Bonafide Residence & Caste Certificate (SC/ST/OBC), Arms License, Revenue Cases, Public Grievance and Personnel Information System. ? Judiciary District Court Information System (DCIS) is implemented in 30 District & Sessions Courts and some Additional District & Sessions Court for capturing case related information right from the filing of the case to the consignment of the case. Various reports viz: Case status, cause list, interim orders and judgments and registers are generated through the system. A query counter is also functional in the court premises and printout at a nominal cost of Rs 2 is made available. VC Facility is functional between the principal seat and the bench. Some of the other systems implemented are Leave Management Software, Lower Courts Statistical System (for calculating quarterly disposal of each court), Credit Information System (for evaluating the work performance of judicial officers), Salary Accounts and Recruitment System. For gathering various informations of all the CJ's, Judges and former Judges and Registrars one can easily log on at http://hcraj.nic.in/. ? BPL Census Technical support was extended to the survey conducted to select families living below poverty line in rural areas. It covered content preparation, validation of data, preparation of modules for generation of score based tables, generation of list of BPL families, hosting of BPL families details and preparation of various reports. ? NREGS The application is deployed in 12 districts and training imparted to resource persons for operationalization, support (Telephonically and e-mail) to all blocks, uploading of data received from blocks (http://nrega.nic.in) and organizing workshops for further enhancement and problem solving. ? Treasury Computerization System (TCS) The software is implemented in all 38 Treasuries and 110 Sub-Treasuries. The portal (http://fin.raj.nic.in) has also been deployed for monitoring daily cash flow by finance department. Another sub-system of Pay Bill generation and data depository has also been implemented for the benefit of over 600 thousand employees. For pilot run, the web portal (http://paymaster.raj.nic.in) has also been launched to provide details to Secretariat employees. ? Employment Exchange Management System (EEMS) The software has been implemented in all 7 divisional offices and 39 exchanges under Director of Employment and Training for online registration of unemployed youth. ? LFAD An MIS developed and implemented for the benefit of Audit Department covers Audit Para Monitoring System, Audit Programme Scheduling, Audit Party Formation, Audit Balance Sheet Monitoring, Local Bodies database maintenance, PIS and Payroll. ? E-GRAM A web based application (http://egram.raj.nic.in) to provide single window interface for the benefit of citizens at the grass root level to bridge the digital divide. The objective is to have a simple and regular feed back mechanism to ensure effective service delivery to the ultimate beneficiary. ? NICNET Intelligent Network Operation Centre & State Data Centre is established at Secretariat to meet state level project requirements. Around 68 Web sites/applications are hosted and 32 districts and 13 Central Government Project locations are connected with 2 mbps links. Each NIC district centre is NICNET Point of Presence centre so as to extend the facility to Tehsil / Block level. ? Videoconferencing This service inaugurated by Hon'ble CM of Rajasthan Smt. Vasundhara Raje in all 32 districts is being regularly used since 2004 to interact with district officers to implement decisions & to review the progress of the various projects and services like e-Samadhan. Policies and Strategies Training Various training programmes have been organized by different centers throughout the state by providing courses and workshops on various ongoing projects. More than 3000 officials have been trained on 15 projects in a number of training programmes. National Projects National Projects like Registrar of Companies, Regional Passport Office, Central Excise, Customs Department, Joint Directorate General of Foreign Trade, Employee Provident Fund Office and AGMARKNET are running successfully. District Highlights Multifarious administration activities, project implementation, infrastructure creation and trainings are being taken care of. Connectivity through 2 mbps Leased lines and eye catching Video Conferencing studios with VC facilities established. Services of DIOs and DIAs have been recognized. AWARDS ¡ TCS- Oracle e-Governance Excellence for IT and Revenue efficiency ¡ Apna Khata (Land Revenue Computerisation Project)-First runner-up award for excellence in IT Government Sector, 18th August 2005, jaipur ¡ District Informatics Officers (DIO/DIA) from Pali, Dungarpur, Jalore, Bundi are awarded by the District Administration On the occasion of Republic Day/ Independence Day, 2007. ACCOLADES “This was a long awaited experience, some fine tuning needs to be done- I am sure that we carry on using the systems, there will not only be improvement but also will be most useful for the State.” Smt. Vasundhara Raje, Chief Minister, Government of Rajasthan “HEALING has impact on the masses because we have managed to reach rural areas with better surveillance and monitoring” Dr. Digamber Singh, Minister of Medical & Health, Family Welfare Govt. of Rajasthan “It is for the first time that we have the PHC level information available online” Sh. R.K. Meena, Principal Secretary, Medical & Health, Govt. of Rajasthan
