---
title: "Regional Transport Office goes On-line"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 1996"
pages: [7]
author: "From our Pune Correspondent"
section: "PROJECTS"
---

## Regional Transport Office goes On-line

The National Informatics Centre (Western Region) has developed a Transport Office on-line System (TOOLS) for handling day-to-day work at Regional Transport Offices (RTO), Pune.

A transport office needs to maintain and handle variety of information concerning vehicle registration; taxation; drivers licences; vehicle permits; prosecution; vehicle fitness etc. The TOOLS integrates all the information into one comprehensive system. This means that the data generated by an activity is easily available for the use of other activity.

One of the main function of TOOLS is to provide quick on-line information and its processing for giving various services to the public. For this purpose the public windows are equipped with a terminal and a printer. Most of the manual procedures are replaced by computer based work flows and procedures. These procedures are designed so that the vehicle owner gets all the needed documents immediately at a counter.

NICNET connectivity of Transport Commissioner's Office with other RTOs has been established for NICMAIL service. The necessary hardware and software has already been installed at RTO Pune, Kolhapur and Nasik. NIC has also taken up the responsibility of further implementation of the same at RTO Thane, Nagpur, Amrawati and Aurangabad, during the current financial year.
