---
title: "ROHTAK:
ICT Hub for e-Governance in Haryana"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2013"
pages: [39, 40]
author: "Vikas Gupta, Munish Gupta and Jitender Singh"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## ROHTAK:
ICT Hub for e-Governance in Haryana

The district derives its name from its headquarter town Rohtak, which is said to be a correction of Rohtashgarh, named after Raja Rohtash, in whose reign the city is said to have been built. Information technology has brought phenomenal change in delivery of services to the citizens making it faster, efficient and effective. District Administration in collaboration with NIC District Centre is committed to provide SMART services to its citizens. NIC District Centre, Rohtak is playing a pivotal role in providing and promoting the ICT culture by delegating accurate, transparent and responsive information and services to the district, which has radically changed the process of e-Governance in the district, enhancing transparency and betterment of citizen centric services. I appreciate, Mr. Munish Babu Gupta, DIO, Rohtak and his team for their dedicated efforts in making e-Governance initiatives successful in the district. NIC Rohtak District Centre, established in the year 1988, has contributed immensely in inculcating informatics culture in the district and at present is a hub for many e-Governance activities utilizing ICT for promoting transparency and good e-Governance. With full support of District Administration, NIC has been able to accelerate the pace of e-Governance activities in the district. e-Patwar Kendra e-Patwar Kendra at Sampla was established to update data of Roznamcha etc, directly by the patwari himself, so that farmers and landlords could easily avail revenue related information. All the patwaries of tehsil are available for assisting public at e-Patwar Kendra. Panchayat/Mc Voters List Generation systeM Through the new ICT based system, ward-wise voter-list is generated for use in Panchayat and MC Elections in a simplified manner. It is derived from the voter list of Assembly and Lok Sabha. The system has resulted in generation of correct lists thus saving a lot of time, money and efforts. GeneraL eLections Comprehensive ICT support was provided for Haryana General Assembly, Lok Sabha, Panchayat and MC Elections covering duty assignments, randomization of polling booths, polling parties, EVMs etc. Helplines were also established and operated successfully. Communication Plan, Result Dissemination and extensive ICT support services were provided round the clock during elections. e-district Project Shri Bhupinder Singh Hooda, Hon’ble Chief Minister, Haryana, launched citizen services delivery through e-Disha (Ekal Sewa Kendra for delivery of citizen services) centre at Rohtak. The centre has 20 ICT enabled counters, helpdesk and a token issuance system. The citizen services being delivered include services like registration of vehicles, different types of driving licenses, National and State Permits, NOC, NCRB Reports, Birth & Death certificates, Nakal of RoR, applications for water/sewerage, Ration cards and social welfare schemes. iMMunization inforMation systeM Launched by Sh. Deepender Singh Hooda, Hon’ble M.P. Rohtak, the application was developed to monitor the immunization records of children. The system enables easy storage of mobile numbers of parents or relatives of child during his/her birth along with other details. As per schedule of vaccine, an SMS is sent on their mobile to ensure timely immunization. Mustard ProcureMent and MonitorinG systeM The system has been designed to facilitate farmers with market related information to ensure that they can sell their produce on e-Governance prescribed rates in a hassle-free manner. The system is fed with data deduced by surveying a mustard sown field. Interpreting the same, system generates a coupon that provides information related to where, when and how much mustard can be sold by the farmer. ProPerty reGistration In Rohtak, around 250 property deeds are being registered daily through HARIS software. The stamp duty fee is generated automatically by the system as per collector rate. The system has facility to generate various reports like Reference Book, Index and Income Tax Statement required by the Income Tax Department. Land records For automatic generation of new Jamabandis by incorporating mutations in the fixed period of time, HALRIS software is being used. The software is also being used for issuance of nakals of Jamabandi and mutations to the public. onLine reGistration for eMPLoyMent A system has been developed for the unemployed youth to register themselves online for employment in a hassle-free manner. The system rejoices wide scale acceptance among the common masses. e-record Web Enabled Court Cases Software, is being used to generate Cause lists, Judgement writing etc. in the office of Divisional Commissioner and District Administration, Rohtak. heaLth Suite of software packages for monitoring the prevention of food adulteration, Medical Certification of Cause of Death (MCCD), Processing Bed Occupancy & Mortality Rate, DOTS (Directly observed treatment short term for eradication of TB disease), Medicine Inventory Management and GOI sponsored IDSP (Integrated Disease Surveillance Project) has been installed in the district. sociaL weLfare dePartMent Online Haryana Pensions Processing & Information System has been implemented for about 1 lakh pensioners in the district. It is helping in timely disbursement of pension to Old age, Widows, Handicapped, MR, Ladli, FADC and other types of pensioners. senior citizen id card software The project has been implemented in the district for creating database of senior citizens along with issuing them ID Cards besides dispensing other benefits. PubLic GrieVance MonitorinG systeM (http://harsamadhan.gov.in) This system has been implemented across the district for speedy disposals of grievances. Post office Post offices of Rohtak District have been connected with 2 Mbps leased line through NIC District Center for e-Services to citizen. Computerized Postal Life Insurance, Western Union Money, EMO services, Speed Post services, New Pension Scheme, Postal Accounting System and e-Post etc are being implemented at the Post Offices.
