---
title: "Securing Windows Server 2008 - Prevent Attacks from Outside and Inside Your Organization"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2009"
pages: [48]
author: "Vivek Verma"
section: "Views - Book Review"
---

## Securing Windows Server 2008 - Prevent Attacks from Outside and Inside Your Organization

Windows Server 2008, heralded as 'the most secure Windows Server ever', offers an assortment of features, new or modified, like Active Directory, Branch Office, Core Infrastructure, High Availablity, High Performance, Identity and Access, Internet Information Services 7.0, Presentation Virtualization, Security and Policy Enforcement, Server Management, Virtualization with Hyper-V and Storage and Print Solutions. However, in order to use these grand features fully, system administrators and security professionals must install, configure, monitor, log and troubleshoot a dizzying array of new features and tools designed to maintain the integrity of their network servers and keep them secure. This in itself is a very big task considering the rate at which it is attacked by malicious hackers.
This book is the comprehensive guide needed by system administrators and security professionals to master seemingly overwhelming arsenal of new security tools including: Network Access Protection, which gives administrators the power to isolate computers that don't comply with established security policies. The ability to enforce security requirements is a powerful means of protecting the network; Enhanced solutions for intelligent rules and policies creation to increase control and protection over networking functions, allowing administrators to have a policy-driven network; Protection of data to ensure it can only be accessed by users with the correct security context, and to make it available when hardware failures occur; Protection against malicious software with User Account Control with a new authentication architecture; and Increased control over your user settings with Expanded Group Policy - to name just a handful of the new security features. In short, Windows Server 2008 contains by far the most powerful and complex suite of security tools ever released in a Microsoft Server product. The book provides system administrators and security professionals with the knowledge they need to harness this power. It describes new technologies and features in Windows Server 2008, such as improvements to networking and remote access features, centralized server role management, and an improved file system. It outlines steps for installing only the necessary components and subsystems of Windows Server 2008 in your environment. No GUI needed. It describes Windows Server 2008's security innovations, such as Data Protection using BitLocker facility, Network Access Protection, Federated Rights Management, and Read-Only Domain Controller. It also includes coverage of monitoring, securing, and troubleshooting Windows Server 2008. It covers Microsoft's Hyper-V virtualization technology, which is offered as an add-on to four of the eight versions of Windows Server 2008 and as a stand-alone product. The book nicely explains fine tuning and monitoring of Terminal Services to ensure optimal usage of network resources and enhancing user experience while accessing remote applications.
