---
title: "Senior Management Strategy Facilitation Workshop, NIC HQ"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2004"
pages: [20, 21]
author: "Swarup Dutta, NIC HQ and E&Y Team"
section: "Happenings"
---

## Senior Management Strategy Facilitation Workshop, NIC HQ

One of the most important ways in which organizations gear up for greater success is by envisioning the future. This entails assessing untapped potential existing within the internal resources of the organization (namely in terms of its people, processes and technology), appreciatively looking at the accomplishments of the organization and forecasting the demands of the changing environment and context. Therefore, it is imperative for all high performing organizations to time and again re-examine their plan and formulate an appropriate strategy for future action. Being an organization of high technical excellence and repute, NIC realizes that in order to remain at the forefront of technological advances it is vital for our Senior Management to articulate long term, medium term and short term goals in order to chart a course of action to emerge as the leader in the field of information technology.
With this objective, a one-day workshop was conducted by NIC , facilitated by Ernst & Young Human Capital Practice Team on 31st August 2004. The workshop witnessed enthusiastic participation from over 40 senior management officers, sharing their vision, views, ideas and strategies for NIC. Many officers from Pune, Hyderabad, Trivandrum, Chennai, Chandigarh and Mumbai participated via video conferencing facility at the NIC HQ.
As a backdrop to the workshop, E&Y had earlier circulated a questionnaire on the INTRANIC, to which they received over 180 responses from our offices across the country as well across levels (Technical Officers: Deputy Director Generals, Senior Technical Directors, Technical Directors, Principal Systems Analysts, State Informatics Officers, District Informatics Officers, Senior Systems Analysts and also Administrative Officers: Directors, Joint Directors, Deputy Directors and Section Officers). The questionnaire aimed at gathering inputs from headquarters and state level employees on key components of People, Process and Technology at NIC. The responses acquired from the questionnaire formed the basis for the agenda of the Senior Management Strategy Facilitation Workshop as it set the ball rolling and helped the senior management to further build on the ideas and views expressed by their fellow colleagues and juniors earlier.
The daylong Senior Management Workshop sought inputs from the participants on various issues required to articulate a roadmap for future actions to be taken by NIC in order to emerge as an organization par excellence. The workshop started with an address by the Director General (NIC) followed by an introduction by the E&Y team. This was followed by an activity-based session where participants were divided into smaller think-groups and were asked to interpret a photograph in the organizational context. The activity was aimed to highlight the importance of teamwork, leadership and the need to utilize potential inherent within the organization. The think-groups expressed their aspirations for NIC in terms of its People, Processes and Technology, the hurdles that they foresaw in realizing those aspirations and the way they could overcome those hurdles. The groups also deliberated to prioritize the goals NIC should achieve in the short term (2-3 years), medium term (4-5 years) and long term (5-7 years) keeping in view the practicality and the need of the organization so that there is a stage wise approach towards sustaining NIC as the leader in Information Technology. State Units for the tremendous support in smooth conduct of the workshop.
