---
title: "South Tripura: Taking ICT to the Grassroots"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2015"
pages: [34, 35]
author: "Shashi Ranjan"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## South Tripura: Taking ICT to the Grassroots

South Tripura District is situated in the southernmost tip of the state of Tripura, sharing border with Bangladesh. The weather remains pleasant throughout the year. Belonia is the district headquarters and has the Indo-Bangla check post. The district comprises 3 sub-divisions, eight blocks, 70 ADC villages and 90 Gram Panchayats.
Introduction
Faced with new challenges in the wake of rapid social and technological changes, and mounting public demands for more efficient and transparent public administration, governments are now striving hard to transform and reinvent the governance system. To achieve this objective, NIC has implemented several projects in the district.
The District Centre of NIC at Belonia is doing excellent work in association with the District Administration in spreading IT culture in the Collectorate and Revenue Offices at sub-division and block level with the cooperation of CIC and SWAN. It is through e-Governance that we can bring transparency and efficiency in the administrative system, and can serve the society effectively. I appreciate Shri Shashi Ranjan, District Informatics Associate, NIC South Tripura for his instrumental role in providing NIC services and support to the District Administration for making e-governance a true success.
yyDistrict Portal: Designed and hosted by NIC, the website of South Tripura District, http://southtripura.gov.in/, is very informative. Apart from providing the details related to land, climate, history, fairs and festivals, tourist places, citizen charter etc., it also provides information regarding the various initiatives undertaken by the District Administration for the benefit of citizens.
yyIntegrated Land Registration, Land records and Cadastral Maps (http://jami.tripura.gov.in)
a. Land Registration at the Sub-registry Offices: The workflow- based web application implemented throughout the district captures biometric details of the seller and the buyer and land details from land records. The system auto-calculates the fees and generates the deed. The seller and the buyer are intimated through SMS.
b. Land Records at the Revenue Circle Offices: This web-based application developed in Bengali is a unicoded database hosted at the State Data Centre, and is made accessible over the net to all the four Revenue Circles of the district. It maintains and updates the land records data and provides digitally signed RORs to land owners and other users. SMS integration after completion of mutation has been accopmlished.
c. Bhunaksha: Web based Bhunaksha has been implemented and is presently providing copies of the map for the Tehasils in the district.
yyNDAL (http://10.24.245.133/ armscode): The National Database on Arms Licenses is a web-based project to maintain information about arms licenses issued in different categories. Presently, Gomati and South Tripura districts are being handled in collaboration.
yyeROR: (http://eror.tripura.nic.in): Ordinary Resident Register (ORR) is a physical register maintained in the state of Tripura at the lowest tier of local self-government (urban as well as rural) to record the details of the citizenry. Citizens are not entitled to civic services and benefits unless their names are recorded in the register. This eROR application has been developed to achieve real-time management of citizen database in Tripura. It has been implemented in four blocks of the district and the remaining blocks will be covered soon.
yyPRIASoft (Panchayati Raj Institutions Accounting Software): PRIASoft software for Financial Management & Accounting of Panchayati Raj Institutions has been implemented in all the blocks of the district.
yyBorder Area Development Programme: This application for maintaining physical and financial statistics has been implemented in all the 6 border blocks of the district.
yyEnergy Billing System: The system has the facility to record and index the power distribution inventory viz. pole, transformer, feeder etc. mapped to each consumer. On a daily basis, system generated meter reading sheets are carried to the consumer premises for recording the current meter reading. The data is then fed into the system after which it automatically generates the current bill along with arrear payable, if any. The consumer receives the bill and comes to the on-site/off-site collection counters. On payment, the system-generated receipt is handed over to the consumer. Day-end collection and bill summary are auto generated. The consumer ledger is auto updated while information on bill, collection and consumer ledger is available over Internet and kiosks. Defaulter list and notice is also generated on monthly basis.
yye-Suvidha (http://esuvidha.tripura.nic.in): e-Suvidha is a workflow-based web-application to automate time-bound citizen-centric services (Caste, Income, Distance, Residency and Survival Certificates). The software supports OL digital photographs, collection of charges, workflow monitoring, etc.
yyNSAP: The National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP), consisting of all the Social Pension schemes, is running in the entire district through Social Welfare machineries (CDPOs).
yyMGNREGA: NIC provides complete assistance to the District Administration for implementation of MNREGA software both offline and online to effectively monitor the scheme’s status, job creation and employment-generation activities along with Aadhaar seeding. e-FMS developed for MGNREGA has reduced delay in wage transfer directly into the beneficiary account.
yySECC: The Socio-Economic Caste Census commenced during the year 2013 with the help of enumerators and supervisors at Block and Nagar Panchayat levels, and is going on smoothly.
yyTransport Computerization
The newly-created District Transport Office at Santirbazar is well connected with the Tripura SWAN. The two flagship applications Vahan and Sarathi serves citizens by providing smartcard-based Vehicle Registration Certificates (RCs), along with issuing Driving Licenses (DLs). Using another module of Vahan, route permits for contract and stage carriages are issued through a web-based application http://tsu.trp.nic.in/permit) which aides in quick monitoring and issuance of the route permits.
yyElections: During the Lok Sabha Elections, a software was implemented for the assistance of the Election Department in randomization of EVMs, assigning and monitoring of election duty of micro-observers and polling personnel, expenditure monitoring, E-Rolls monitoring, etc.
yyForest Rights: NIC has developed district/sub-division level application for issuing titles of forest land under Recognition of Forest Right Act-2006.
yye-Courts: The web-based application monitors day-to-day activities of the Judicial Offices of the District Court along with generating reports to monitor the number of cases listed, pending and disposed under a particular judgeship. SMS services has been integrated for advocates and parties concerned.
yyIDRN: India Disaster Resource Network is an electronic inventory of resources that enlists equipments and human resources, collated from districts.
yyOther information: CIC is functional in all BDO offices in the district. SGRY (Sampoorna Gramin Rojgar Yojana), Gramodaya, ASSP (Asanghotitha Sramik Shayaika Prokolpa) are also implemented in the district.
yyPayroll Management System (PMS): PMS has been successfully implemented in the offices of DM, Collector, SDM and BDO through CICs.
