---
title: "Success Story of ICT for e-Governance"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2008"
pages: [9, 10, 11, 12]
author: "Moiz Hussain Ali"
section: "From the States/UT"
---

## Success Story of ICT for e-Governance

Maharashtra is one of the most progressive states in India in terms of commercialisation of economy. The state is famous for Industrial sector and Mumbai, its capital which is also known as financial capital of India. The State is also famous for rich cultural heritage. Nasik, Aurangabad, Nagpur, Poona are emerging cities of the state having 35 districts. NIC in Maharashtra was established in 1988 as part of nation-wide computer and communication network, NICNET. Ever since, NIC has been in the forefront of e-governance initiatives in central and state government departments in Maharashtra upto district and tehsil level through its NIC district Centres in 35 district collector offices.

NIC Maharashtra State Centre, Mumbai is assisting Government of Maharashtra in major e-governance and office automation projects by using latest state-of-art computer software and hardware technology. NIC is continually improving its Processes through a team of Competent Professionals, Adoption of Appropriate Technologies, Use of International Standards and Best Practices. Various indigenous e-Governance initiatives are cited below-

e-Governance Initiatives

*   Storage Area Network- SAN: This center, having storage capacity of 4 Terabytes, provides Website hosting, Internet and E-mail services to Mantralaya and District LAN users. It also provides Dialup facility to Government departments. The network centre is linked to VSAT PAMA of NICNET-MAHANET network between District Collectorates and Mantralaya, Mumbai.
*   Food and Civil Supplies information system- MAHAFOOD: MAHAFOOD is a web-based application which automates the various stages of movement of food grains. The data entered at different locations are summarised and consolidated to provide an e-governance solution for effective decision making and monitoring the progress of monthly allotment, lifting, off-take and distribution of essential commodities under various schemes. URL is http://mahafood.mumbai.nic.in
*   Status Information Management System by NIC-SIMNIC: SIMNIC is a web-based application which acts as a single-window for online data collection in dynamically created formats from remote field offices of government departments. It is available in 10 Indian languages. URL is http://mahasim.nic.in
*   NIC-Maha Website: This Web Portal caters to the needs of officials to provide all information related to NIC in the territory of Maharashtra. It acts as a ready reference to all the projects undertaken by NIC Maharashtra State Centre. It also provides search option, download and feedback facilities. This portal is available at URL http://maharashtra.nic.in
*   Lokayukta Automation System- LAS: LAS is a workflow application for the Office of Lokayukta and Upa-Lokayukta, Government of Maharashtra. It enables registration of complaints regarding allegations and grievances and helps the Lokayukta office in monitoring & redressal process. It also facilitates inward of letters / references related to the complaints and general letters.
*   Indian Administrative Service Personnel Information System- IASPIS: IASPIS is a web-based application which automates the various matters related to service book of IAS personnel. It is used for generation of executive and civil list and to provide instant and up-to-date information regarding service matters to all members of service.
*   Land Records Information System: CLR (Computerisation of Land Records), developed by NIC, is implemented in all tehsils of Maharashtra. LMIS is used for taking mutations and distribution of 7/12 extracts to Khatedars and PCIS (Property Card Information System) is used for taking mutation distribution of Property Cards through the City Survey Offices(CTSOs) and Taluka Inspector of Land Records(TILR). Computerised Land records of 357 Tehsils of 35 districts are uploaded on the central website http://mahabhulekh.mumbai.nic.in for display to Common Public and Banks for sanction of loans to farmers.
*   Zilla Parishad Accounting System ZPAS: ZPAS is to automate the activities in the Finance division of Zilla Parishads and integrate its activities with the Panchayat Samittees, other departments and Rural Development Department (RDD). It is designed to aid the departments to do their day-to-day accounting processes, including bills processing, reports consolidation, grant watch. It generates various Monthly, Quarterly and Annual reports, Cheque slips related to Finance Department
*   Court Cases Automation System-CCAS and Adjourned Cases Enquiry System ACES: CCAS and ACES are developed for the Office of Chief Presenting Officer, Maharashtra Administrative Tribunal (MAT), Mumbai. These systems facilitate Government Offices and employees to obtain the status of their pending cases over Mantralaya Intranet and Internet. The detailed information of a case such as Case no, type, year of filing etc. are maintained in CCAS and the status may be enquired in web-enabled ACES by giving any Case no., hearing date, applicant name and department name. ACES may be accessed at the URL http://www.matmumbai.nic.in.
*   Certificate Issuing and Monitoring System- CIMS: This system is developed for issuing various certificates like SC, ST, Senior citizen etc. issued by the Mumbai City District Collectorate Office. It includes enquiry and search facilities.
*   e-Governance for Directorate of Cotton Development Mumbai under DACNET Project: Under DACNET project, a portal is developed for Directorate of Cotton Development Mumbai to disseminate information related to cotton (which is a Nodal Crop for this Directorate) to the different stakeholders like farmers, state agriculture department, extension personnel, NGOs, Ministry of Agriculture etc. The URL of this portal is http://dacnet.nic.in/cotton. A software is also developed for monitoring the progress of Centrally Sponsored Intensive Cotton Development Programme (ICDP) under Mini Mission-II of Technology Mission on Cotton in the country.
*   House Allotment System HAS: HAS is a web-enabled system developed for General Administration Department and Public Works Department so that Government quarters in Mumbai may be allotted to State Government employees in an efficient way. Using the software, the applicant can file application and get the current status. It helps the departments to monitor the vacancy position and repair status of the quarters. It supports Marathi and English.
*   Videoconferencing facility: All district collector offices are connected to NIC Mumbai and Secretariat through IP based VC network of NICNET. VC facility is also provided to the camp office of President of India, Prime Minister of India during their visits to Mumbai.
*   Web sites of Districts of Maharashtra: District websites of all districts of Maharashtra is designed and hosted by each NIC District Centre in NIC data centre. VPN facility is provided for secured uploading /updating of content from the districts.
*   Notary Information System- NIS: Notary Information System maintains the details of all Notaries registered in Maharashtra State. It also generates the Notary Register.
*   Accreditation Card Management System ACMS: ACMS is developed for Director General of Information and Public Relation Department, Government of Maharashtra for issuing Accreditation Card for journalists working all over the state. It helps the data-entry operator to get the list of card holders, agency, locations and journalists.
*   Tour Bill Information System TBIS: TBIS takes care of tour details and bills of Ministers, Secretaries and Ministerial Staff of Government of Maharashtra. It keeps record of all the tour bills and generates Expenditure Statements.
*   Telephone Bill Management System TBMS: The system is mainly meant for billing and managing of telephones allotted to Ministers and Private Secretaries. It incorporates allotment, bill entry, bill generation, change of number, inward/ outward for inter-office transaction of bills.
*   CM Relief Fund Monitoring System CMRFMS: CMRFMS is a workflow application for the Chief Minister Secretariat, Government of Maharashtra. It maintains a Relief Fund Account, which is contributed by regular donors such as Sugar Factories, APMC and casual donors such as an Individual, Sports Associations, Clubs, Private Companies etc.
*   Central Government Project Group-CGPG: Computer services are provided to the following offices at Mumbai as part of the NIC Central Government Projects: Passport, Central Excise, Custom, Trade Mark, ROC, Textile, High Court, and Post Office.
*   Common Integrated Police Application- CIPA: NIC Maharashtra State centre has implemented the CIPA application in 127 Police Stations covered under Phase I of the project. CIPA application will maintain the details pertaining to all the activities of the Police Station relating to Crime & Criminals using the Registration, Investigation and Prosecution modules. The phase II is being implemented in 190 police stations in Maharashtra.
*   Panchayat Portal: Content on Panchayat portal http://panchayat.nic.in is created for Village/ Taluka Panchayat and Zilla Panchayats of 18 districts in Maharashtra.
*   Sarathi: The Learner's driving license component of Sarathi 2.0 software of NIC was inaugurated at Western India Automobile Association, Mumbai by Sh. G. S. Gill, Principal Secretary Transport and State Excise, Government of Maharashtra in presence of Sh. S. D. Shinde, Transport Commissioner Maharashtra State, and Sh. Moiz Hussian Hussain Ali, State Informatics Officer, NIC - Maharashtra.
*   Consumer Forum Network-CONFONET: 43 Locations of District Consumer Forums in Maharashtra are provided application software and necessary computers with connectivity with NICNET.
*   Utility Mapping Project for MCGM Mumbai under JNNURM project of Planning Commission: NIC Maharashtra Centre has completed the installation and commissioning of Control Centre and five remote Centres for Utility mapping project for Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai. Digitised map data is being installed on the central server for the 468 Sq Km. area of Mumbai.
*   Department of Post Network DoP: NICNET connectivity to 38 Post offices in Maharashtra is being implemented through NIC District Centres of Maharashtra.
*   Personnel Information System for Maharashtra-MAHAPIS: MAHAPIS is a web-based application which automates the various service related matters of Officers/staff of various departments of Government of Maharashtra. It is used for generation of leave orders and to provide instant and up-to-date information regarding service matters. (URL: http://mahapis.mumbai.nic.in )
*   Geographical Information System for Maharashtra: Atlas of all districts of Maharashtra is prepared and uploaded on the http://gis.nic.in website.
*   Training: Necessary trainings are conducted at NIC Maharashtra State Centre with well equipped audio-video aids, NIC Application Software, Office Automation tools and Web-Based Technology. NIC projects developed for various State/Central Government departments are demonstrated during every training programme. Practical training is also imparted to all the participants during the programme.
