---
title: "Tikamgarh : ICT in the Interiors"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "July 2004"
pages: [7]
author: "Santosh Kr Shukla, Madhya Pradesh Correspondent"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## Tikamgarh : ICT in the Interiors

Tikamgarh, located in the erstwhile ancient Orchha state and a place of great historical importance is situated in the northern part of Madhya Pradesh. The district spreads over an area of 5048 Sq. Km. and has six tehsils and six blocks comprising 971 villages, with a population of 12 lakh. The Hon’ble Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh Ms. Uma Bharati, also belongs to Tikamgarh. NIC Tikamgarh Unit was set up in the year 1988 and with the active participation & coordinated efforts of the NIC MP State Unit and the District Administration, NIC Tikamgarh enjoys its position as a premier IT consultant at the district level. All the projects handled by it can broadly be categorized into National, State and District level projects. € | National/State Level Projects – ™ DISNIC PLAN – For the purpose of decentralized planning, DISNIC National level project has been successfully implemented in which, data of all the villages in the district has been computerized. ™ Treasury Computerization – Software for district treasury computerization has been successfully implemented in the district treasury. ™ DRDA Computerization – • Establishment of LAN for the DRDA Computerization. • Appropriate software for the computerization of BPL Survey data and generation of various reports/queries has been developed. A database of more than 70,000 records was created which is still in use. • Software for fund distribution of various schemes and progress monitoring. • Software (PRAGATI) which enables the transmission of the monthly progress under various rural development schemes was implemented. ™ Computerization of Land Records – Land Records computerization project has been successfully implemented in all the six blocks of the district. Computer generated copies of Khasra/B1 forms are being distributed. ™ DCIS- District Court Information System has been implemented facilitating the generation of daily cause lists. Apart from this, Payroll software has also been implemented for the district court. ™ 11 Points Programme- A database of rural sector on different parameters has been created. Which is updated on monthly basis. Reports are being generated for district administration to improve the citizen centric services and keep track of the status of different facilities. ™ Gyandoot – Gyandoot is a self sustainable and community owned rural intranet. The project is a G2C model. Computers in 13 village/municipal centers in the district are wired and connected with district server. It offers agriculture commodity rates, Grievance redressal, Rural e-mail facility, Employment News etc. ™ AGMARKNET – AGMARKNET has been made operational in Krishi Upaj Mandi Samiti, Tikamgarh. Besides the above NIC Tikamgarh has also been involved in the creation of several databases pertaining to programmes such as Rajeev Gandhi Drinking Water Mission, Small Scale Industries, Prime Minister Rojgar Yojna, Child Labour, Pulse Polio Programme, etc. € | District Level Projects- As a part of its constant endeavor to bring about total computerization in administration of the district activities, NIC Tikamgarh has developed and implemented various software including ™ Public Grievances Information System ™ Arms License Information System ™ Kerosene Oil Distribution System ™ Merit List Preparation System ™ Election Polling Party Formation System ™ Below Poverty Line Information System ™ Panchayat Directory € | Web Services - The Web Site for the District (http:// tikamgarh.nic.in)has been designed and developed by NIC Tikamgarh and hosted on NIC’s web server. Content of the site is also regularly updated and maintained by NIC Tikamgarh. € | Other Activities - ™ Expansion of NICNET : For the expansion of NICNET, RAS based dialup connectivity has been extended to 20 offices. ™ Touch Screen Kiosk– In order to introduce e-governance, Touch Screen kiosk has been installed at the composite building. Information about district, Citizen Charter, Public Grievances, 11 Points Programme, Important Telephone Numbers, Bus/Railway Time Table etc, is presently available on it. ™ Training – Conducting general and need based computer training programme has been an integral part of the activities of the NIC Centre at the district. Today, NIC Tikmagarh is one of the ever busy and indispensable NIC Centers in the State. Through sheer hard work and constant efforts NIC Tikamgarh has been able to spread the IT culture in the district. NIC Tikamgarh District Unit District Informatics Officer Ratan Kumar Shori District Informatics Associate Anil Kumar Jain For further information, please mail to tikamgarh@mp.nic.in
