---
title: "Tirunelveli: A pioneer District in e-Governance implementation"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2011"
pages: [34, 35]
author: "R.Gayatri, S. Devarajan, P. Arumuganinar"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## Tirunelveli: A pioneer District in e-Governance implementation

Tirunelveli District is one of the oldest and biggest districts in Tamil Nadu State with 11 Taluks and 19 Developmental Blocks as its administrative units. The District has a large number of educational institutions, hence, the title "Oxford of South India". In spite of its traditional way of administration, Tirunelveli leads the way in implementing e-Governance projects for various Departments of the District. NIC Tirunelveli District Unit was established in August 1988 and a couple of years back it has been shifted to a spa-cious and renovated office in the new Collectorate premises. Since its inception the District Unit is a pio-neer in implementing many suc-cessful e-Governance projects. The following is a glimpse of suc-cessful e-Governance initiatives of NIC, Tirunelveli District Unit: Pension Disbursement and Management System: The monthly Pension Disbursal and Management System is successfully implemented for the last 20 years. The System is imple-mented in 11 Sub-Treasuries of the District and it is replicated in many other Districts of the State. Details related to more than 30,000 Government pensioners are main-tained in the system every month. Some new initiatives in this project are: e-Pension: From the month of November 2008, all the pensioners of the District have been benefitted by the introduction of e-Pension. Under the URL http://www.nellai.tn.nic.in, using the option "Know Your Pension", the pensioner may know his/her full pension particulars. Annual mustering of Pensioners electronically (e-Mustering): From the month of April 2009, the pensioners have been benefitted by the introduction of e-Mustering sys-tem. The new system provides the following advantages: On the spot mustering of pension ers by referring to the electronic photo images on the screen. The waiting time for pensioner is reduced drastically from 30 min-utes to 3 minutes. Issuance of Certificate on a pre-printed stationary, on the spot Keeping of 34,000+ pensioners images on the database. Due to the new system, approximate-ly 85% pensioners mustered their presence within a short span of 2 months. Monthly pension particulars through mobile (m-Pension): The pensioners may know their monthly pension particulars on the mobile handset available with them, by sending an SMS to a dedicated mobile number which is attached to the SMS Server. A cost effective SIM Card is used for this purpose. Since its commencement more than 18000 pensioners received their Pension particulars to their Mobile using this innovative service. e-MO Software: Tamil Nadu Government is granting monthly maintenance grant to the Differently Abled persons - with Mental Retardation, Cerebral Palsy, Autism and Multiple disabilities. The Money orders were earlier sent through con-ventional mode which took a long time for delivery. Similarly Department of Revenue, Tirunelveli is sending Money Orders to beneficiaries under Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme and Other beneficiaries of State Schemes. As on date 47,173 pensioners are get-ting pension under the category of Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension, Widow Pension, Destitute Widow Pension, Destitute Agricultural Labourers Pension, Physically Handicapped Pension and Unmarried Women Pension in the District. To speed up the work of pension dis-bursement a Government Process Re-engineering (GPR) strategy has been evolved. The "e-MO", application soft-ware enabled the office to send the same monthly grant and the monthly pension by electronic Money Order (eMO). The newly designed "Data Conversion Engine", automatically converts the beneficiary database into XML format, which is required by Department of Post for booking the money order electronically. ON-LINE Grievances Redressal System: Management of Public Grievances Petitions is made ON-LINE since August 2009. The ON-LINE GDP System was implemented horizontally in 40 geographically different loca-tions like District Collector's Office (7 counters), Revenue Divisional Offices, Taluk Offices and Panchayat Union Offices. On every Monday, the peti-tions are registered throughout the District by these 40 specially arranged counters in the District. The Line Department and its offices available in various locations in the District can also feed the reply for the Petitions concerned from any location using an Internet Connectivity. Information Kiosks in 425 Village Panchayats: All 425 Village Panchayat Offices in this District have been recently sanctioned computers, laser printers, Broadband/WLL based internet connectivity and other sup-porting computer accessories at an outlay of Rs. 2.5 Crore. In order to pro-vide various e-Services for the benefit of rural public, student community and the un-employed youth in the rural region, an integrated web enabled application has been designed for the use of all 425 Village Panchayat Offices in this district. OTHER APPLICATIONS Tamil Nadu Infosystem on Land Administration and Management (TAMIL-NILAM): TAMIL-NILAM has been implemented in all 11 Taluk offices. It contains data related to more than 18 lakh land parcels and 20 lakh land owners. More than 5 lakh Land Ownership certificates have been issued through the system since its inception in the year 2000. Using the vertical connectivity of Tamil Nadu State Wide Area Network (TNSWAN) up to all 11 Taluk Offices, the locally updated data is immediately replicated to the State Server, which is further dis-seminated to the public, using the web enabled services of TAMIL-NILAM (Any Time / Any Where Land Records). Electronic File Processing System: 25 Sections and 15 other Offices which are located in the Collectorate new building are now connected with Collectorate Local Area Network. Using the existing LAN connectivity, a web enabled application - Electronic File Processing System (EFPS) is under use by all these departments since January 2010. All the files including Letters, Memo, emails, Documents etc., are to be maintained by the num-ber generated by the EFPS System for all its correspondence. Various other Databases & Projects: VAHAN and SARATHI Project for Transport Department are under use successfully in 2 RTO Offices and 3 Unit Offices in this District. The District level databases like BPL Survey, Census, Animal Husbandry Live Stock Census, Ration Card Database, RSBY, Rain Fall Data etc., are available. Technical support is also extended for the frequent Video Conferences, General Election, Local Body Elections, AgmarkNET, ConfoNET Project, Government Job-fair, dissemination of Examination Result, Disbursement of Government Scholarship for SC/ST and BC College Students. The success of innovative e-Governance activities is mainly due to mutual co-ordination and co-opera-tion between NIC and all the user departments. District Collector has awarded DIO and DIA with a Commendation Certificate during the Independence Day Celebrations of 2009. It has been an incentive to strive further as a team towards good e-Governance.
