---
title: "TRAINING SESSION ON ‘ACCRUAL BASED ACCOUNTING’ MODULE HELD FOR ITANAGAR & PASIGHAT MUNICIPAL COUNCILS ON 23rd & 24th JULY, 2014"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2014"
pages: [48]
author: "Debasish Nath, Amujao P., Arunachal Pradesh"
section: "In the News"
---

## TRAINING SESSION ON ‘ACCRUAL BASED ACCOUNTING’ MODULE HELD FOR ITANAGAR & PASIGHAT MUNICIPAL COUNCILS ON 23rd & 24th JULY, 2014

A two days long training session on ‘Accrual based Accounting’ module, under the e-Municipality Applications Suite, based on NMAM (National Municipal Accounting Manual) was organized at Itanagar Municipal Council Office, Naharlagun on 23rd and 24th July, 2014. The application has been developed by NIC, Pune for implementation in Urban Local bodies of Arunachal Pradesh. The pilots of the project have been rolled out at Itanagar (Papum Pare district) and Pasighat (East Siang district) Municipal Council Offices. The training on the module was conducted by Ms. Anjali Bembalkar, PSA, NIC, Pune. Shri Poras R. Deshmukh, TD, NIC, Pune, Coordinator for Department of Town Planning & ULBs, GoAP’s ‘eNagar yojana’ was also present during the session. The training was facilitated by the Department of Town Planning & ULBs, GoAP with technical support and resource faculty from NIC Pune & NIC State Centre, Arunachal Pradesh. The training session started on 23rd July, 2014 with a welcome speech by Shri Sukhvinder Singh, Sr. Town Planner, Department of Town Planning & ULBs, GoAP. Shri Poras Deshmukh, TD gave an outline & objectives of the session to the participants from Itanagar and Pasighat Municipal Council Offices. ‘Accrual based Accounting’ application is role based software, which has been deployed presently at NDC, Pune. During the training, functionalities of Administrator, DDO and Date Entry Operator (Accountant / Clerk) were displayed online. Fund, Fund Function Mapping with Budget, Masters Entry, JV Voucher, Contra Voucher, Receipt Voucher etc. topics were covered during the session. The focus of the training was to acquaint the participants with role-wise functionality of the application. The participants took keen interest in the hands-on sessions and did entry of actual data of financial year 2013-2014. It was also decided that the participants shall be allowed to test the application with actual data of financial year 2013-2014 till 15-Aug-2014 and feedback, if any, should be shared with NIC, Pune. From 16-Aug-2104, both Itanagar and Pasighat Municipal Councils have started with the live entry of data of financial year 2014-2015.
