---
title: "Udham Singh Nagar: Moving ahead with ICT"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "April 2011"
pages: [33, 34]
author: "Deepak Johri, Prite Joshi"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## Udham Singh Nagar: Moving ahead with ICT

Named after the legendry freedom fighter Shaheed Udham Singh, the district Udham Singh Nagar is also known as the 'Gateway to Kumaon hills'. It is famous for the world renowned Pantnagar University, which is one of the leading landmarks of learning in the fields of agriculture and technology. The district with a population of around 12 lakhs, spread across 656 villages in 7 sub-divisions and 27 Nyay Panchayats is fast developing as the leading industrial hub of the state of Uttarakhand.
SINCE its inception in 1998, NIC, Udham Singh Nagar has played the key role in extending the e-Governance services to the people of the district. NIC officials have been awarded many times by the administration for effective promotion of ICT activities in the district and successful implementation of e-Governance. Even today, the NIC, District Centre is partnering the district administration to promote ICT based initiatives for the betterment of service delivery to the citizens and improving their quality of life.
State Wide Area Network (SWAN): One of the major achievements of the recent times is the implementation of SWAN in this hilly terrain, where connectivity was the major challenge. Under SWAN, 9 PoPs (Point of Presence) have been established connecting all the Tehsils & Blocks in the District to District Headquarters. Many State Government Departments such as Finance, Rural Development etc. eCourts have already started using the SWAN PoP's for transmission of data for treasuries, MNREGA & other online projects while a number of Tehsils & Blocks have started audio-video sessions at District, State & National level. The SWAN connectivity has also been extended via LAN to Tehsil Land Records Computer Centre present in Kiccha, Kashipur, Sitarganj & Bajpur Tehsils, and to collectorate LAN with 80+ nodes extending Internet at the desk of the district administration.
e-Courts & Confonet: Under the District Court Computerization Project (e-Court) in the district, e-filing has been implemented and single window query system has been started. Uploading of cause list is being done on regular basis while the Judgments are also being uploaded on the web site. The District Consumer Forum (CONFONET) project also facilitates case filing & cause list entries are available on the website http://confonet.nic.in.
District Treasury Online: The District Treasury has been connected to the NIC District Centre and all the district level accounting/transactions get updated on the treasury website http://ekosh.uk.gov.in/ in real time basis. The system is very effective for monitoring the financial health of the district and the state.
Land Records Computerization: All the tehsils of the district are generating Khatauni or Record-of-Rights (ROR) with the help of Devbhoomi software deployed at Tehsil Level Land Records Computer Centers. The manual process of Khatauni has been totally replaced with computerized system and web services have been deployed for uploading the latest khatauni information on the state land records portal http://gov.ua.nic.in/devbhoomi/ . This enables the citizen to view his or her ROR online on Internet without the need to run around government offices for the same.
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act: Effective computerized monitoring of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act-2005 (MNREGA) is running since the year 2006 in district. All seven blocks have completed the offline data entry and are now carrying out the entries in an online mode on regular basis. Around 74000 registrations have already been done in the national level website of MNREGA.
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojna (RSBY): RSBY is a health insurance scheme for the BPL families under which a smart card has been issued to each BPL family for all kind of medico-legal transactions. Udham Singh Nagar was one of the leading districts to implement the project. The first phase, which included personalization & distribution of smart cards for nominated BPL families, has already been completed in all the seven tehsils.
National Informatics Centre, Udham Singh Nagar has been functioning in this district since 1998. Over the years the District Centre has contributed effectively in promoting ICT activities and eGovernance implementations in the block offices, tehsil offices and other line departments functioning in the district. I appreciate the efforts of of Shri Deepak Johari, DIO & Ms. Prite Joshi, DIA and wish them best of luck for all their future assignments. -- M.C. UPRETI IAS & District Magistrate, Udham Singh Nagar
VAHAN & SARATHI: VAHAN & SARATHI applications for vehicle registration and issuance of driving license respectively have been operational in the district since 2007. More than 110000 vehicle registrations have been carried out so far through the system while 20,000+ computerized driving licenses have been issued using SARATHI. Both these applications have immensely benefitted the citizens of the district and transport authorities.
Election Computerization: NIC, Udham Singh Nagar has always played a key role during the Lok Sabha, Vidhan Sabha, Municipal or Nagar Panchayat elections. Almost all the election processes, viz, polling personnel deployment, counting personnel deployment, random allocation of booths to polling parties have been streamlined and automated. In addition, the district centre also facilitates and ensures online transmission of counting and results data to the Election Commission of India (ECI), Doordarshan and State Election Commission at the time of electons.
ICT Support to Other Departments: Apart from this NIC, District Centre is also providing ICT support to many other departments & offices in the district. All the district level officials have been provided e-mail facilities. Video Conferencing sessions are held on regular basis between State and District administration for departmental meetings and performance reviewing purposes. Several IT based applications such as Public Grievance Monitoring System, Letter Monitoring & Forwarding System, Arms & Licenses System have been implemented to help the district administration while an employment exchange portal has been hosted to help the student community and unemployed youth of the district. The district website of Udham Singh Nagar http://usnagar.nic.in provides the complete information of the district including its statistical profile, banking, industry, tourism information and much more.
For further information
DEEPAK JOHRI
District Informatics Officer
National Informatics Centre,
Room No 107, 1st Floor,
Collectorate, Rudrapur,
Udham Singh Nagar,
Uttarakhand-263153
Ph: 05944-246424
uausn@nic.in
