---
title: "Wardha - An emerging ICT Destination"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2008"
pages: [22, 23]
author: "Moiz Hussain Ali"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## Wardha - An emerging ICT Destination

Wardha District in Maharashtra was a part of erstwhile Nagpur district till 1862. It was made a separate district chiefly on the ground that Nagpur as it then stood was a too large district for administrative purpose. Since then the district is forging ahead with time. Under the guidance of NIC Maharashtra State Centre, Mumbai the NIC Wardha district centre was set up in 1988 with a long-term objective of setting up a computer-based informatics culture for decision support to the district administration & government departments. With its inception, the centre has extended its informatics support to the district administration through various software development, networking, databases management and computer awareness training programs etc. Wardha district is well known for its political & historical background in pre and post independence era. The district is situated on the western side of Wardha-Vainganga valleys in south-east Maharashtra with three divisions and 8 Talukas. Famous as land of Mahatma Gandhi's Satyagrahi thoughts and Bhudan movement of Vinoba Bhave, the existing Wardha district is fast becoming an IT hub. As compared to other districts in Maharashtra State, Wardha District might be smaller in area but greater with its fame. Major ICT Activities ? District Networking The District Collectorate networking has been strengthened with the commissioning of 2 Mbps Leased Line over NICNET. This connectivity is also being used for IP based Video Conferencing and for hosting web based applications of the collectorate. A Local Area Network (LAN) has also been established within and outside the collectorate connecting various State and Central government departments through Ethernet and RF. All these departments are now using Internet facility for web applications and e-mail etc. The District level database of Land Records (Mahabhulekh) is made available for revenue department through this District LAN. Touch screen kiosk ? Information of Record of Right using Touch Screen kiosk Touch screen information kiosks have been setup at Vividha Centre, by NIC Wardha to facilitate easy access of Record of Rights to the citizens. General people are using this utility extensively to know the latest status of RoR independently. Farmer package on Wardha district website NIC, Wardha extended all communication facilities of Internet and e-mail to the officials of PM office during the visit of Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to Bapukutir, Sewagram & Waiphad villages of Wardha district. The communication infrastructure was extensively used by the officials who applauded the efforts of NIC, Wardha. Collector Wardha and NIC Wardha jointly formulated presentation of the Farmers' package announced during the visit, and took up the challenge of dissemination of information about the package to common man and farmers through its website http://wardha.nic.in. Director Vasantrao Naik Sheti Swawlamban Mission appreciated regular updation of Farmer Package information on Website of NIC Wardha District. Farmer. wardha.nic.in Software Development of Current Revenue Demand for Tala this. Current Revenue Demand utility deals with Land revenue cess based on Village Form-7 and education cess / EGS cess based on Village form-12. Normally it takes around 2 to 3 man months for talathis to do tedious calculations and prepare such reports for revenue collection. This utility facilitates quick and accurate generation of current revenue demand of a village and facilitates easy revenue recovery from eligible khata holders as per the revenue act. This software is developed at NIC Wardha and subsequently presented by the then Collector in Collector's conference held at Mumbai in January 2006. Settlement Commissioner has accepted the software for implementation in entire Maharashtra. Current Agriculture Land Revenue Demand Monitoring system for Project Affected base Appointments This software generates seniority list, required for project affected base appointments. The backlog data was collected in the prescribed format and Data Entry has already been completed. Registration number is generated for each concerned project affected. The various MIS reports generated by the application help in decision-making & implementation of recommendations of state Government Departments as per Administrative rules. Training to Government Employees NIC Wardha has conducted many training programmes for state & central Government employees on computer basics and implementation of various projects. These trainings have helped the district administration in getting acquainted with the current trend in ICT and implementation of the activities of respective IT based projects. In addition of supporting district informatics NIC Wardha has implemented various Central and State Govt. Projects like CONFONET, IDSP, LMIS, PCIS, MPLAD, RURALSOFT, PANCHAYAT PORTAL, AGMARKNET, SIMNIC, Bharat Nirman, and Jalswaraj etc. Technical support is also provided to District administration for Zilla Parishad and Panchyat Samiti Elections process.
