---
title: "West Delhi- Bringing e-Governance at your door step"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2008"
pages: [20, 21, 28]
author: "Sandeep Jain"
section: "District Informatics"
---

## West Delhi- Bringing e-Governance at your door step

Delhi the political hub of India has always been the foremost city with successive dynasties choosing it as their seat of power from the past. Among the nine districts in Delhi, West Delhi forms an indispensable part of Delhi both technologically and economically. Of late the area is spruced up with the latest and the most futuristic technology providing an excellent platform for the whole nation to forge ahead with time and technology. In 1997 Delhi was divided in nine revenue districts with the Deputy Commissioner being the Head of the District and reporting to Divisional Commissioner, Delhi. NIC West District Unit came into existence in 1997 with an objective to bring e-Governance & office automation with MIS & Decision Support System in the District Administration. The present system of administration in West Delhi is enticing e-Governance to promulgate it in a much transparent way. Front Office on a working day in Office of the Deputy Commissioner (West) Some major e-Governance projects undertaken by the District Unit over the years are as follows. e-Praman Patra The Deputy Commissioner Office is the single interacting office with public for the issuance of various kinds of certificates like: Caste Certificate (SC/ST/OBC), Income Certificate, Domicile Certificate, Birth/Death certificates, Marriage Registration Certificate etc. The software has been implemented in all the Sub Divisions and is monitored at District level. The software tracks the application from the receipt of application to the issuance of the certificate. Security paper is being used to reduce the fraudulent certificates. Citizens can apply online through http://districts.delhigovt.nic.in as well as view the status of certificates through website. With the implementation of this software, citizens have been largely benefited, pendency of applications has been reduced and transparency in the system has alleviated the role of middleman. e-Dastavej (DORIS) The system provides for Registration of Documents of property transactions with various security checks, on-line capturing & storing of photographs of buyer, seller and witnesses, information of Registration fee. This system has bought down the registration time from 21 days to few hours. Land Acquisition Monitoring Information System It computerizes the whole Land Acquisition Process transforming the manual process of Record keeping pertaining to details of Land Acquisition, Award, Possession & Compensation. The software has been implemented at the office of Land Acquisition Collector. Citizens have benefited in getting the compensation in time whereas the District Administration has saved revenue due to timely payment of compensation. Indraprastha Bhulekh (Land Records) The “Computerized Issuance of RORs” was inaugurated by Hon'ble Chief Minister Smt. Shiela Dixit of Delhi and it has been implemented at Sub Divisional level to computerize the land records and has reduced the time for the citizen in getting a copy of ROR. Citizens can also view their records through http://districts.delhigovt.nic.in Inauguration of Issuance of Computerized RORs (Land Records) by Smt Shiela Dikshit, Hon'ble Chief Minister of Delhi Prime Minister's Rojgar Yojana & Swarn Jayanti Shahari Rojgar Yojana Under the PMRY & SJSRY scheme loans are recommended to the unemployed as well as to the underprivileged sections. The software has been implemented in the district to monitor the entire process of recommendation of cases and to generate various reports. Citizens can download the application form, view the interview date, committee recommendations, date on which recommendations have been forwarded to bank from front office. Recovery Information System Recovery Information System has been implemented at the Sub Divisional level and at district to monitor the various recovery cases of financial institutions, labour courts etc. The recovery cases are monitored from the receipt of application to the generation of notices, attachment warrants, arrest warrants and various other MIS reports. The citizens can get the status of case through front office. Bhagidari Information Management System Bhagidari Scheme has been initiated by Delhi Government to involve citizens in decision-making processes through the participation of Resident Welfare Associations. Bhagidari Information Management System has been implemented in the district level to monitor the various issued raised by RWAs and the action taken by the departments to resolve these issues. Quote from Sh. Sanjay Kumar Saxena, Deputy Commissioner, West Delhi “NIC District unit has contributed effectively in promoting the e-governance and IT culture to the district, sub-divisions and Sub Registrar Offices. Comprehensive implementation of various e-Governance projects like e-Dastavej, Indraprastha Bhulekh, LAMS, e-Praman Patra etc., have brought transparency & efficiency in the system.” Court Cases Monitoring System The Court Cases Monitoring System has been implemented at Sub Division, Land Acquisition Collector and District level to monitor Revenue Cases, Reference Cases, General Cases etc. Networking & Internet Connectivity A well established structured LAN is in place in DC office complex housing the offices of Deputy Commissioner's office, Additional District Magistrate office, Sub Divisional Magistrate Office and other branches of the office. Internet connectivity is provided through a 2 mbps leased line. Other projects & services The NIC District Center has also implemented various other software like ? Citizenship Information System ? Riots Victims Information System ? Stamp Refund Monitoring System ? Sealing & De-sealing of Industrial Units, ? Applications under RTI, ? J&K Migrants, ? Verification of character antecedents etc. ? Training
