---
title: "“Winds of Change in Lakshadweep”: A basket of e-Governance projects to transform quality of life"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2008"
pages: [26, 27, 28]
author: "B.V. SELVARAJ, IAS"
section: "Guest Column"
---

## “Winds of Change in Lakshadweep”: A basket of e-Governance projects to transform quality of life

The Union Territory of Lakshadweep is a group of 36 coral islands and islets of which eleven are inhabited. These Islands lie scattered randomly in the Arabian Sea, about 220 to 420 Kms off the Malabar Coast; geographically isolated each island behaves almost like a country by itself (called 'Nadu' in local tongue, meaning 'Desh' in Hindi). Lack of adequate transport facilities and deficiencies in communication in these islands pose a major problem for the masses. It takes around eight days during normal season and fifteen days during monsoon to go to the headquarters island of Kavaratti and avail of important services and return to one's native island. To virtually integrate these far- flung islands, Lakshadweep Administration has implemented several e- governance projects with focus on delivering services virtually anywhere, as also to usher in transparency, accountability and efficiency in the extension of public services. Information and communication technology has helped digitally integrate the geographically dispersed islands in respect of several important needs of life. In the last two months this year, in recognition of our concerted and scientific efforts two of e-governance projects have been selected for prestigious awards for best e- governance practice and sustainable e- content. This is a clear indication that Lakshadweep is not lagging behind anymore. Some of the major projects undertaken by the Administration recently would give a flavor of our ICT endeavour. Total Digitization of Employment Services This e-Governance project aims at safeguarding objectivity and transparency in providing employment and in facilitating dynamic utilization of human resource and bringing employment exchange services to the very doorsteps of the people of Lakshadweep. Employment Exchanges all over the country, we know, are infamous for their long and chaotic queues of desperate job seekers. Timely and systemic on-line registration from any part of India or abroad, maintenance of seniority and on-line sponsoring of names to employers/ government departments has been achieved under this project which goes a long way in bringing trust between government agencies and the unemployed persons and the numerous job seekers. Services are now virtually made available in all the islands. A day of pride for Lakshadweep: Sh. B.V. SELVARAJ speaks after receiving the Manthan Award at New Delhi (L to R : Sh. Asarpal Singh, Sh. K.P. Mohammed Koya, Sh. A.K.Saxena, Sh P.M.Koya, Sh U.C.K. Thangal, Sh. Ajith Brahmanandan and Smt. K.K. Humaida Beevi) Incidentally, Lakshadweep has attained the unique distinction of being the first UT / State in the country to fully digitize its employment exchange and related services in the country. Ministry of Labour & Employment in Govt. of India have also evinced interest now, as this project has a high replicable potential and would definitely help the young human resource of India to dynamically and objectively participate in rapid economic development. This project has therefore, aptly been recognized by a twenty- member fastidious Jury of ICT professionals and has justifiably received the Manthan Award 2007 for being the best e- Governance project with e-content sustainability Web-enabled Lakshadweep Electricity Department (Web-LED) The Web-LED project is a total e-governance solution designed for the Department of Electricity, providing for “a digitally integrated Department where all the services to the consumers, employees and business are available online from anywhere”. All the offices of the department in the islands and mainland are interconnected through NICNET-VSAT facilities. Web-enabled work flow systems have been developed for all the public activities of the department, namely electricity consumer management, energy billing, complaints management, materials management, human resource management etc. It is notable that every household in every island is electrified in Lakshadweep; this is the first case of universalization of electricity. Under this project a consumer can prepare his own bill through self-reading of meters. This project has deservedly received the CSI- Nihilent e-Governance award 2006-07 for the best e- governed department. Sh. B.V. Selvaraj, addressing the gathering with Sh. Ashok Aggarwal, Convener, CSI Interest Group on e-Governance & Director, ACS Technologies on the Dias. PORTNET Being scattered in the Arabian Sea, the main mode of transport for the common man in the islands is ship service. Shipping is truly the lifeline of people of Lakshadweep. All the thirteen port offices of the Administration have been interconnected, extending the NICNET's VSAT based communication network. This network has enabled Web-based ship ticket passenger reservation and cargo booking systems. The ship schedules, ship ticket availability, status of ship tickets are now available through internet providing transparency and easy access. Tickets for any ship from “anywhere to anywhere” can be booked through the authorized booking counters at Kochi, Kozhikode or in any of the islands. This project has received the Microsoft National E- Governance Award, 2006 for ”Innovative Project”, being first of its kind in the shipping sector. Video Conferencing Facilities Video Conferencing facilities have been installed this year in all the inhabited islands. This facility is provided through the NICNET-VSAT's installed in all the islands, including the smallest and remotest island of Bitra, having a population of less than 300 people. On the Independence Day of 2007, first time in the history of Lakshadweep, the Administrator interacted one-on-one with all the heads of the Village (Dweep) Panchayats and the Dy. Collectors / SDO's located in the remote islands through video conferencing. It has brought the islands closer and has definitely boosted the morale of the people. Web-enabled Permit Management Information System U.T. of Lakshadweep is a restricted area. A valid entry permit is required for visiting the islands. Permits are issued from the administration office at Kochi. The Permit Management System accepts applications for entry permit and issues the permit. The status of permit applications can be viewed through internet. This is a workflow system and issues permit after due checking by the authorities. Sub Divisional Officers and Station House Officers in various islands get advance information about the permits issued and they can verify the authenticity of a physical document by cross checking it in the web. The system is being upgraded to accept applications on-line from anywhere. Web-enabled Students Scholarship Management System for processing scholarships for the students from Lakshadweep studying in various educational institutions in the mainland is already under implementation. The system validates the scholarship claims based on the pre- assigned criteria and processes the claims and generates the sanction orders and the bills. The students and their institutions can get the status of their scholarships from anywhere in India. Lakshadweep possesses the unique distinction of having Computer Labs and internet facilities in all the schools. There are 33 Vidhya Vahini Community Information Centres functioning in the Territory providing Internet services to the general public for availing various services. The EDUSAT facility is also made available in all high schools and receive-only EDUSAT terminals in all other schools in the territory Common Integrated Police Application (CIPA) All the police stations in Lakshadweep have been provided with the adequate computer hardware and software for implementing the Common Integrated Police Application. They are being stabilized and the project will take off shortly. “Ever Alert”: Web-enabled Medical Inventory Management System The web-enabled medical inventory management system proposes to inter-connect all the hospitals, community health centers (CHC's), primary health centers (PHC's) in various islands and the Medical Directorate at Kavaratti. The availability of life saving and other medicines and various appliances, with their complete details in any hospital, CHC or PHC will become available to the concerned officials through web. The system would ensure 'ever alert' authorities whenever there is a shortage of medicines or appliances in any island. The Telemedicine Facility provided by ISRO is available in five hospitals in the islands. A close liaison is being established with reputed hospitals like AIMS, C.M.C. Vellore etc. for effective use of the facility. Factors that inspired success The critical factors for success of e-governance projects in Lakshadweep are many: (i) Frequent co-ordination and review at the level of Administrator, thereby continuously providing leadership and motivation for execution of the tasks on day to day basis. (The need for a strong political and administrative will for e-Governance is a real challenge all over the country and it often becomes critical for success or failure of the projects). (ii) High degree of cooperation, mutual understanding and team work of the user departments and their officials under Lakshadweep Administration and the technocrats of the National Informatics Centre is a noteworthy feature here. Important Learning for the Future Use of right technology in the right place with appropriate administrative reforms can benefit the masses at base of the pyramid of the society. The web based services are most suited for hinterlands like Lakshadweep and other geographically isolated territories. Internet facilities bring mobility among youth to any part of the world, removing physical constraints and sluggishness. Meaningful and structural administrative reforms coupled with ICT measures can flourish symbiotically. Our Administration has been striving towards effective administrative reforms through aggressive e-governance measures along with all the political representatives including Member of Parliament, Chairman and Members of the District and Village (Dweep) Panchayats. We are going to have “a basket of e-governance projects” and may even compete shortly for becoming best e-administered State/ UT of the country.
