---
title: "WORKSHOP ON STATE PROJECTS MANAGEMENT PORTAL CONDUCTED AT DEHRADUN ON 19TH & 20TH JUNE 2014"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "October 2014"
pages: [47]
author: "Dr. Shubhag Chand, DELHI"
section: "In the News"
---

## WORKSHOP ON STATE PROJECTS MANAGEMENT PORTAL CONDUCTED AT DEHRADUN ON 19TH & 20TH JUNE 2014

A training workshop on ePMS-Online Project Management System Portal was organized for Govt. of Uttarakhand at Dehradun Secretariat, Uttarakhand on 19th and 20th June 2014. The program was chaired by Shri C. Ravi Shankar, IAS, Addl. Secretary, Deptt. of Planning, Govt. of Uttarakhand. ePMS, an On-line Project Management System for Uttarakhand, tracks the projects involving investment worth of Rs.100 crores to Rs.1000 crores. It enhances the efficiency of the system by bringing transparency and improving the communication between industries & Government and States & Centre. It automates the entire tracking process of stalled investment projects in context of bottlenecks. The event started with the welcome address by Shri C. Ravi Shankar which was followed by introductory speech from Shri D. C. Bijalwan, Under Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat. Technical introduction was given by Shri Vinod Kumar J, Scientist-B, NIC, Delhi followed by presentation for both admin and private entrepreneurs. Whereas, hands on for Private Entrepreneur module, Sponsoring Ministry Module, Recipient Ministry Module and Monitoring Ministry Module was given by Shri Amar Arora and Shri Vinod Kr . During the hands on, all the users were provided with a To-Do list having multiple options which they were made to try in accordance to their respective roles. The actual adding of projects, acceptance by the sponsoring and comments made by the recipients etc. were tried by the users with the help of Shri Vinod and Shri Amar and the individual queries and doubts were also resolved. The private entrepreneurs were also informed to bring the real issues on the next day so that real projects can also be entered in the live portal. On second day i.e. 20th June 2014, admin module was demonstrated which includes how to accept/reject/referred back the projects/issues submitted by the sponsoring and recipient ministries, generating and sending agenda online, entering decision online when the PMG subgroup meeting is going on, generating various types of reports and graphical charts for monitoring purpose. In the technical session, requirements of admin module along with functional role and responsibilities involved were elaborated in detail. The private entrepreneurs were also made to enter the actual projects with real issues in the live portal, with which 6 new projects were made to enter in the Uttarakhand State Portal and one project was entered in Central Portal as its cost was above Rs. 1000 crores. The training workshop was attended by 30 participants from all across the state of Uttarakhand.
