---
title: "Workshop on e-SamikSha Online System conducted at Cabinet Secretariat, Rashtrapati Bhawan, New Delhi"
publication: "Informatics"
issue_date: "January 2015"
pages: [47]
author: "Dr. Shubhag Chand, Delhi"
section: "In the News"
---

## Workshop on e-SamikSha Online System conducted at Cabinet Secretariat, Rashtrapati Bhawan, New Delhi

e-Samiksha portal is a real time, online system for monitoring of follow-up actions on the decisions taken during the presentations made by different ministries/departments to the Prime Minister on various subjects like infrastructure target, Ganga Rejuvenation, Swachh Bharat, Centre State coordination, etc. The follow-up action in respect of each decision is to be updated by the concerned Ministry/ Department/ State Govt. as and when the status changes or at least every month.
A workshop/training session via video conferencing on eSamikSha Online System for Government of Bihar was organized at Conference Room, Cabinet Secretariat, Rashtrapati Bhawan, New Delhi. The training session was chaired by Chief Secretary- Shri Anjani Kumar Singh, IAS, and Shri Brijesh Mehrotra, Principal Secretary, Cabinet Coordination Department, Govt. of Bihar organized the event. Principal Secretaries, Secretaries and designated officers of more than 40 departments of Govt. of Bihar participated in this session.
The Chief Secretary said that the system will assist in improving the communication between Central Ministry/Dept. and Bihar Government in respect of pending issues and follow-up on action points generated by the meetings chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister and Committee of Secretaries.
The demonstration of e-Samiksha Portal regarding the roles of state users was conducted by Cabinet Secretariat Informatics Division. A real time example was also discussed to give them the better understanding of categories like Swachh Bharat, Centre State Coordination etc. After demo, Chief Secretary interacted with all Principal Secretaries/Secretaries/ officers of various departments on the sited issues using the online eSamikSha Portal for 2 hours. Complete event was carried out successfully with coordination from NIC officials of Bihar Secretariat.
